
    stochastic gradient descent hidden markov model gaussian mixture model
    cepstrum mel frequency cepstral coefficients filterbank feature extraction
    spectrogram short time fourier transform fundamental frequency formant
    phoneme grapheme phonology morphology syntax semantics prosody
    waveform sample rate quantization aliasing nyquist theorem
    encoder decoder attention mechanism transformer neural network
    connectionist temporal classification CTC loss beam search decoding
    language model perplexity word error rate WER character error rate CER
    speaker diarization voice activity detection speaker recognition
    zero shot transfer learning fine tuning pre trained model
    code switching language identification multilingual speech
    sequence to sequence model acoustic model pronunciation dictionary
    forced alignment time stamps Viterbi algorithm forward backward
    recurrent neural network LSTM GRU bidirectional attention
    convolution pooling batch normalization dropout regularization
    adam optimizer learning rate warmup cosine annealing
    end to end automatic speech recognition ASR TTS text to speech
    vocoder waveform synthesis WaveNet WaveGlow HiFi-GAN
    spectral subtraction Wiener filter noise reduction voice enhancement
    speaker embedding d-vector x-vector ECAPA-TDNN speaker verification
    prosody pitch energy duration fundamental frequency F0 contour
    dynamic time warping DTW alignment phonetic transcription IPA
    international phonetic alphabet grapheme to phoneme G2P epitran
    low resource language code mixed Hinglish Maithili Santhali Gondi
    adversarial perturbation FGSM fast gradient sign method epsilon
    spoofing detection anti spoofing countermeasure LFCC CQCC EER
    equal error rate mel cepstral distortion MCD voice cloning VITS YourTTS
    zero shot voice cloning speaker adaptation cross lingual synthesis
    
Kind: captions Language: en My strength lies not in my name but in My strength lies not in my name but in My strength lies not in my name but in the backing of 1.4 billion Indians and the backing of 1.4 billion Indians and the backing of 1.4 billion Indians and thousands of years of timeless culture thousands of years of timeless culture thousands of years of timeless culture and and and heritage. So wherever I go I carry with heritage. So wherever I go I carry with heritage. So wherever I go I carry with me the essence of thousands of years of me the essence of thousands of years of me the essence of thousands of years of vic vic vic tradition the timeless teachings of tradition the timeless teachings of tradition the timeless teachings of Swami Swami Swami Viveanand and the Viveanand and the Viveanand and the blessings dreams and aspirations of 1.4 blessings dreams and aspirations of 1.4 blessings dreams and aspirations of 1.4 4 billion 4 billion 4 billion Indians. When I shake hands with a world Indians. When I shake hands with a world Indians. When I shake hands with a world leader, it's not leader, it's not leader, it's not Modi but 1.4 billion Indians doing so. Modi but 1.4 billion Indians doing so. Modi but 1.4 billion Indians doing so. So this isn't my strength at all. It is So this isn't my strength at all. It is So this isn't my strength at all. It is rather the strength of India. Whenever rather the strength of India. Whenever rather the strength of India. Whenever we speak of peace, the world listens to we speak of peace, the world listens to we speak of peace, the world listens to us. Because India is the land of Gautam us. Because India is the land of Gautam us. Because India is the land of Gautam Buddha and Mahatma Gandhi and Buddha and Mahatma Gandhi and Buddha and Mahatma Gandhi and Indians aren't hardwired to espouse Indians aren't hardwired to espouse Indians aren't hardwired to espouse strife and strife and strife and conflict. We espouse harmony instead. We conflict. We espouse harmony instead. We conflict. We espouse harmony instead. We seek neither to wage war against nature seek neither to wage war against nature seek neither to wage war against nature nor to foster strife among nations. We nor to foster strife among nations. We nor to foster strife among nations. We stand for peace and wherever we can act stand for peace and wherever we can act stand for peace and wherever we can act as peacemakers we have gladly embraced as peacemakers we have gladly embraced as peacemakers we have gladly embraced that that that responsibility. My early life was spent responsibility. My early life was spent responsibility. My early life was spent in extreme in extreme in extreme poverty but we poverty but we poverty but we never really felt the burden of poverty. never really felt the burden of poverty. never really felt the burden of poverty. You see, someone who is used to wearing You see, someone who is used to wearing You see, someone who is used to wearing fine fine fine shoes will feel their shoes will feel their shoes will feel their absence when they don't have them. But absence when they don't have them. But absence when they don't have them. But for us, we had never worn shoes in our for us, we had never worn shoes in our for us, we had never worn shoes in our lives. So, how would we even know that lives. So, how would we even know that lives. So, how would we even know that wearing shoes was a big deal? We weren't wearing shoes was a big deal? We weren't wearing shoes was a big deal? We weren't in a position to compare. That's just in a position to compare. That's just in a position to compare. That's just how we lived. When I became prime how we lived. When I became prime how we lived. When I became prime minister, I specially invited Pakistan minister, I specially invited Pakistan minister, I specially invited Pakistan to my swearing in ceremony so we could to my swearing in ceremony so we could to my swearing in ceremony so we could turn over a new leaf. Yet every noble turn over a new leaf. Yet every noble turn over a new leaf. Yet every noble attempt at fostering peace was met with attempt at fostering peace was met with attempt at fostering peace was met with hostility and hostility and hostility and betrayal. We sincerely hope that wisdom betrayal. We sincerely hope that wisdom betrayal. We sincerely hope that wisdom prevails upon them and they choose the prevails upon them and they choose the prevails upon them and they choose the path of peace. I believe even the people path of peace. I believe even the people path of peace. I believe even the people of Pakistan long for peace. Look, of Pakistan long for peace. Look, of Pakistan long for peace. Look, regarding what you said about criticism regarding what you said about criticism regarding what you said about criticism and how I deal with it, if I had to and how I deal with it, if I had to and how I deal with it, if I had to summarize in one sentence, I welcome summarize in one sentence, I welcome summarize in one sentence, I welcome it. I have a strong it. I have a strong it. I have a strong belief belief belief that criticism is the soul of that criticism is the soul of that criticism is the soul of democracy. I want to tell all the young democracy. I want to tell all the young democracy. I want to tell all the young people the people the people the following. No matter How dark the night may seem, it is still just seem, it is still just seem, it is still just night and morning is bound to come. The following is a conversation come. The following is a conversation come. The following is a conversation with Narendra Modi, the Prime Minister with Narendra Modi, the Prime Minister with Narendra Modi, the Prime Minister of of of India. It was one of the most moving India. It was one of the most moving India. It was one of the most moving conversations and experiences of my conversations and experiences of my conversations and experiences of my life. Allow me here to say a few words life. Allow me here to say a few words life. Allow me here to say a few words about it. Please skip ahead straight to about it. Please skip ahead straight to about it. Please skip ahead straight to our conversation if you like. Narendra our conversation if you like. Narendra our conversation if you like. Narendra Mod's life story is incredible. He rose Mod's life story is incredible. He rose Mod's life story is incredible. He rose from poverty to lead a nation of 1.4 from poverty to lead a nation of 1.4 from poverty to lead a nation of 1.4 billion people, the biggest democracy in billion people, the biggest democracy in billion people, the biggest democracy in the world, where he won epic scale the world, where he won epic scale the world, where he won epic scale elections for prime minister three elections for prime minister three elections for prime minister three times. As a leader, he fought for ideas times. As a leader, he fought for ideas times. As a leader, he fought for ideas that unite his nation of India. A nation that unite his nation of India. A nation that unite his nation of India. A nation that is composed of a large number of that is composed of a large number of that is composed of a large number of highly varied and disperate cultures and highly varied and disperate cultures and highly varied and disperate cultures and peoples who have a long history marked peoples who have a long history marked peoples who have a long history marked by religious, social, and political by religious, social, and political by religious, social, and political frictions. He's known for taking frictions. He's known for taking frictions. He's known for taking decisive, at times controversial actions decisive, at times controversial actions decisive, at times controversial actions for which he is loved by hundreds of for which he is loved by hundreds of for which he is loved by hundreds of millions of people and is also millions of people and is also millions of people and is also criticized by many. We discuss all of criticized by many. We discuss all of criticized by many. We discuss all of this at length in this this at length in this this at length in this conversation. On the world stage, he is conversation. On the world stage, he is conversation. On the world stage, he is respected as a peacemaker and friend by respected as a peacemaker and friend by respected as a peacemaker and friend by most major world leaders, even those most major world leaders, even those most major world leaders, even those whose nations are at war with each whose nations are at war with each whose nations are at war with each other, from United States to China to other, from United States to China to other, from United States to China to Ukraine and Russia to Israel, Palestine, Ukraine and Russia to Israel, Palestine, Ukraine and Russia to Israel, Palestine, and the Middle East and everywhere else. and the Middle East and everywhere else. and the Middle East and everywhere else. Now, at this moment in history, it is Now, at this moment in history, it is Now, at this moment in history, it is clear, at least to me, that the clear, at least to me, that the clear, at least to me, that the flourishing of human civilization hangs flourishing of human civilization hangs flourishing of human civilization hangs in the balance with several wars on the in the balance with several wars on the in the balance with several wars on the brink of escalation to regional and even brink of escalation to regional and even brink of escalation to regional and even global conflict, rising tensions between global conflict, rising tensions between global conflict, rising tensions between nuclear powers, technological nuclear powers, technological nuclear powers, technological developments from AI to nuclear fusion developments from AI to nuclear fusion developments from AI to nuclear fusion that aim to completely transform society that aim to completely transform society that aim to completely transform society and geopolitics as we know it, and of and geopolitics as we know it, and of and geopolitics as we know it, and of course, generally increasing political course, generally increasing political course, generally increasing political and cultural turmoil. and cultural turmoil. and cultural turmoil. So now more than ever, we need great So now more than ever, we need great So now more than ever, we need great leaders, great peacemakers who build leaders, great peacemakers who build leaders, great peacemakers who build bridges, not destroy them, who may bridges, not destroy them, who may bridges, not destroy them, who may preserve the identity of their nations, preserve the identity of their nations, preserve the identity of their nations, but still celebrate the common humanity but still celebrate the common humanity but still celebrate the common humanity of all of us, all people on Earth. For of all of us, all people on Earth. For of all of us, all people on Earth. For this and many other reasons, this this and many other reasons, this this and many other reasons, this conversation with Prime Minister Modi conversation with Prime Minister Modi conversation with Prime Minister Modi was one of the most remarkable I've ever was one of the most remarkable I've ever was one of the most remarkable I've ever had. had. had. You may hear such words and think that You may hear such words and think that You may hear such words and think that I'm just enamored by power or access. I'm just enamored by power or access. I'm just enamored by power or access. No, never was, never will be. I do not No, never was, never will be. I do not No, never was, never will be. I do not idolize anyone, especially those in idolize anyone, especially those in idolize anyone, especially those in power. I'm generally skeptical of power, power. I'm generally skeptical of power, power. I'm generally skeptical of power, money, and fame because of their natural money, and fame because of their natural money, and fame because of their natural corrupting influence on the mind, the corrupting influence on the mind, the corrupting influence on the mind, the heart, the soul of a person. The whole heart, the soul of a person. The whole heart, the soul of a person. The whole point of all the conversations I've had point of all the conversations I've had point of all the conversations I've had in my life, on mic and off mic, is that in my life, on mic and off mic, is that in my life, on mic and off mic, is that I try to see and explore the full I try to see and explore the full I try to see and explore the full complexity of every human being, the complexity of every human being, the complexity of every human being, the good and the good and the good and the bad. I believe we're all the same in a bad. I believe we're all the same in a bad. I believe we're all the same in a deep fundamental sense. All capable of deep fundamental sense. All capable of deep fundamental sense. All capable of good, all capable of evil, all carry good, all capable of evil, all carry good, all capable of evil, all carry stories of pain and stories of hope. stories of pain and stories of hope. stories of pain and stories of hope. Whether you're a world leader or a truck Whether you're a world leader or a truck Whether you're a world leader or a truck driver, a coal miner, or a farmer in the driver, a coal miner, or a farmer in the driver, a coal miner, or a farmer in the American Midwest. And by the way, I will American Midwest. And by the way, I will American Midwest. And by the way, I will be talking to a lot of the latter kind be talking to a lot of the latter kind be talking to a lot of the latter kind of folk this year off mic and maybe even of folk this year off mic and maybe even of folk this year off mic and maybe even on mic as I travel the US and the world. on mic as I travel the US and the world. on mic as I travel the US and the world. My brief statements here about Narendra My brief statements here about Narendra My brief statements here about Narendra Modi are about both him as a leader and Modi are about both him as a leader and Modi are about both him as a leader and especially him as a human being. In the especially him as a human being. In the especially him as a human being. In the extensive time I spent with him and extensive time I spent with him and extensive time I spent with him and spoke with him off mic and on mic, it spoke with him off mic and on mic, it spoke with him off mic and on mic, it was a deeply personal human interaction was a deeply personal human interaction was a deeply personal human interaction characterized by warmth, kindness, characterized by warmth, kindness, characterized by warmth, kindness, humor, inner and outer peace and humor, inner and outer peace and humor, inner and outer peace and absolute focus on the conversation absolute focus on the conversation absolute focus on the conversation between us in the present moment as if between us in the present moment as if between us in the present moment as if nothing else existed. nothing else existed. nothing else existed. I have heard from many people that he I have heard from many people that he I have heard from many people that he treats everyone he meets in this treats everyone he meets in this treats everyone he meets in this empathic way, no matter where they come empathic way, no matter where they come empathic way, no matter where they come from or what their position is in this from or what their position is in this from or what their position is in this world. So for those and many other world. So for those and many other world. So for those and many other reasons, this really was an incredible reasons, this really was an incredible reasons, this really was an incredible experience I will never experience I will never experience I will never forget. Oh, and by the way, we made forget. Oh, and by the way, we made forget. Oh, and by the way, we made captions and voiceover audio tracks captions and voiceover audio tracks captions and voiceover audio tracks available in English, Hindi, and other available in English, Hindi, and other available in English, Hindi, and other languages. You can also listen to the languages. You can also listen to the languages. You can also listen to the original mixed language version where I original mixed language version where I original mixed language version where I speak English and Prime Minister Modi speak English and Prime Minister Modi speak English and Prime Minister Modi speaks Hindi. Separately, you can choose speaks Hindi. Separately, you can choose speaks Hindi. Separately, you can choose to turn on subtitles in your preferred to turn on subtitles in your preferred to turn on subtitles in your preferred language. On YouTube, you can switch language. On YouTube, you can switch language. On YouTube, you can switch between language audio tracks by between language audio tracks by between language audio tracks by clicking the settings gear icon, then clicking the settings gear icon, then clicking the settings gear icon, then clicking audio track, and then selecting clicking audio track, and then selecting clicking audio track, and then selecting the language you prefer. For fully the language you prefer. For fully the language you prefer. For fully English overdub, select English. For English overdub, select English. For English overdub, select English. For fully Hindi overdub, select Hindi. And fully Hindi overdub, select Hindi. And fully Hindi overdub, select Hindi. And to listen to the original mixed language to listen to the original mixed language to listen to the original mixed language version where I speak English and Prime version where I speak English and Prime version where I speak English and Prime Minister Modi speaks Hindi, please Minister Modi speaks Hindi, please Minister Modi speaks Hindi, please select Hindi Latin audio track. So you select Hindi Latin audio track. So you select Hindi Latin audio track. So you can listen either to a version that is can listen either to a version that is can listen either to a version that is all one language or to the original all one language or to the original all one language or to the original mixed language version with subtitles in mixed language version with subtitles in mixed language version with subtitles in your preferred language. The default is your preferred language. The default is your preferred language. The default is English overdub where thanks to 11 Labs English overdub where thanks to 11 Labs English overdub where thanks to 11 Labs and a great team of translators, we do and a great team of translators, we do and a great team of translators, we do our best to bring the prime minister's our best to bring the prime minister's our best to bring the prime minister's voice to life with AI voice cloning in voice to life with AI voice cloning in voice to life with AI voice cloning in English. I promise that we will continue English. I promise that we will continue English. I promise that we will continue to work very hard to break down the to work very hard to break down the to work very hard to break down the barriers that language creates and try barriers that language creates and try barriers that language creates and try to make these conversations as to make these conversations as to make these conversations as accessible as possible to everyone in accessible as possible to everyone in accessible as possible to everyone in the world. the world. the world. Anyway, let me pause one more time to Anyway, let me pause one more time to Anyway, let me pause one more time to say a big thank you. What a wild ride say a big thank you. What a wild ride say a big thank you. What a wild ride this life has been. It's an honor for me this life has been. It's an honor for me this life has been. It's an honor for me to be on it with all of you. I love you to be on it with all of you. I love you to be on it with all of you. I love you all. This is the Lex Freedman podcast. all. This is the Lex Freedman podcast. all. This is the Lex Freedman podcast. And now, dear friends, here's the Prime And now, dear friends, here's the Prime And now, dear friends, here's the Prime Minister of India, Narendra Minister of India, Narendra Minister of India, Narendra Modi. So, I should also say I'm fasting Modi. So, I should also say I'm fasting Modi. So, I should also say I'm fasting right now. It's been almost two days, 45 right now. It's been almost two days, 45 right now. It's been almost two days, 45 hours. Uh, so just water, uh, no food. hours. Uh, so just water, uh, no food. hours. Uh, so just water, uh, no food. In honor of this conversation, just to In honor of this conversation, just to In honor of this conversation, just to get in the right mindset, get into the get in the right mindset, get into the get in the right mindset, get into the spirit spiritual level. I've read that spirit spiritual level. I've read that spirit spiritual level. I've read that you often fast for many days. Can you you often fast for many days. Can you you often fast for many days. Can you explain why you fast and where does your explain why you fast and where does your explain why you fast and where does your mind go when you fast? mind go when you fast? mind go when you fast? First of all, I'm truly pleasantly First of all, I'm truly pleasantly First of all, I'm truly pleasantly surprised and surprised and surprised and honored that you're fasting. honored that you're fasting. honored that you're fasting. All the more because it feels All the more because it feels All the more because it feels like you're fasting as a tribute of like you're fasting as a tribute of like you're fasting as a tribute of respect for me. So I express my deepest respect for me. So I express my deepest respect for me. So I express my deepest gratitude to you for doing gratitude to you for doing gratitude to you for doing this. In India, our religious traditions are actually a way of life. Our Supreme Court once gave Our Supreme Court once gave Our Supreme Court once gave a brilliant interpretation of Hinduism. It's a way of living, a philosophy that It's a way of living, a philosophy that It's a way of living, a philosophy that guides life guides life guides life itself. And in our scriptures, there is deep scriptures, there is deep scriptures, there is deep discussion on discussion on discussion on elevating the body, mind, intellect, elevating the body, mind, intellect, elevating the body, mind, intellect, soul and humanity. soul and humanity. soul and humanity. They outline various paths, traditions They outline various paths, traditions They outline various paths, traditions and systems to achieve and systems to achieve and systems to achieve this and fasting is one of this and fasting is one of this and fasting is one of them. But fasting alone isn't everything. In everything. In everything. In India, whether you see it culturally or philosophically, sometimes I see that philosophically, sometimes I see that philosophically, sometimes I see that fasting is a way to cultivate fasting is a way to cultivate fasting is a way to cultivate discipline. If I put it in simple terms discipline. If I put it in simple terms discipline. If I put it in simple terms or explain it to the viewers who are or explain it to the viewers who are or explain it to the viewers who are unfamiliar with unfamiliar with unfamiliar with India, it is a powerful tool to bring India, it is a powerful tool to bring India, it is a powerful tool to bring both the inner and outer both the inner and outer both the inner and outer self into self into self into balance. It shapes life in profound balance. It shapes life in profound balance. It shapes life in profound ways. When you ways. When you ways. When you fast, you may have noticed as you said, fast, you may have noticed as you said, fast, you may have noticed as you said, you've been fasting on water for two you've been fasting on water for two you've been fasting on water for two days. days. days. Every single one of your senses, especially smell, touch, and senses, especially smell, touch, and senses, especially smell, touch, and taste, becomes highly taste, becomes highly taste, becomes highly sensitive. You may even notice the sensitive. You may even notice the sensitive. You may even notice the subtle aroma of water subtle aroma of water subtle aroma of water itself. Something you probably never itself. Something you probably never itself. Something you probably never noticed before when drinking it. If noticed before when drinking it. If noticed before when drinking it. If someone walks past you carrying someone walks past you carrying someone walks past you carrying tea, you will catch its aroma just like tea, you will catch its aroma just like tea, you will catch its aroma just like you would with coffee. you would with coffee. you would with coffee. A small flower you've seen before, you A small flower you've seen before, you A small flower you've seen before, you will see it again will see it again will see it again today. But now you can perceive its today. But now you can perceive its today. But now you can perceive its details more vividly. details more vividly. details more vividly. Your senses become extra Your senses become extra Your senses become extra sharp, highly sharp, highly sharp, highly aware and fully tuned aware and fully tuned aware and fully tuned in and in and in and uh their capability to observe and to respond capability to observe and to respond capability to observe and to respond multiplies and grow multiplies and grow multiplies and grow sharper. I have personally often sharper. I have personally often sharper. I have personally often experienced this. Another thing I've experienced this. Another thing I've experienced this. Another thing I've experienced is that experienced is that experienced is that fasting can greatly fasting can greatly fasting can greatly accelerate the thinking process and can accelerate the thinking process and can accelerate the thinking process and can uh give a fresh perspective. You start uh give a fresh perspective. You start uh give a fresh perspective. You start thinking outside the box. I don't know thinking outside the box. I don't know thinking outside the box. I don't know if everyone experiences this but I if everyone experiences this but I if everyone experiences this but I certainly do. certainly do. certainly do. Most people assume that Most people assume that Most people assume that fasting simply means giving up food or fasting simply means giving up food or fasting simply means giving up food or not not not eating. But that's just the physical eating. But that's just the physical eating. But that's just the physical aspect of aspect of aspect of fasting. If someone is forced to go fasting. If someone is forced to go fasting. If someone is forced to go without food due to without food due to without food due to hardship with an empty stomach, can we hardship with an empty stomach, can we hardship with an empty stomach, can we call that call that call that fasting? Fasting is actually a fasting? Fasting is actually a fasting? Fasting is actually a scientific process. Whenever I fast for scientific process. Whenever I fast for scientific process. Whenever I fast for an extended period, I prepare my body in an extended period, I prepare my body in an extended period, I prepare my body in advance for 5 to 7 days before the fast. advance for 5 to 7 days before the fast. advance for 5 to 7 days before the fast. I follow various ayurvedic practices and I follow various ayurvedic practices and I follow various ayurvedic practices and yoga practices along with other yoga practices along with other yoga practices along with other traditional cleansing methods to traditional cleansing methods to traditional cleansing methods to internally reset my internally reset my internally reset my system. Before actually beginning the system. Before actually beginning the system. Before actually beginning the fast, I make sure to drink a lot of fast, I make sure to drink a lot of fast, I make sure to drink a lot of water as much as possible. water as much as possible. water as much as possible. So you could say that this So you could say that this So you could say that this detoxification process helps prepare my detoxification process helps prepare my detoxification process helps prepare my body in the best possible way. And once body in the best possible way. And once body in the best possible way. And once I begin fasting, for me it's an act of I begin fasting, for me it's an act of I begin fasting, for me it's an act of devotion. For me, fasting is a form of devotion. For me, fasting is a form of devotion. For me, fasting is a form of self- self- self- discipline. For me discipline. For me discipline. For me personally, even while I go about doing personally, even while I go about doing personally, even while I go about doing my daily activities during a my daily activities during a my daily activities during a fast, my fast, my fast, my mind remains deeply mind remains deeply mind remains deeply introspective and focused introspective and focused introspective and focused inward. And that experience is inward. And that experience is inward. And that experience is profoundly transformative for me. profoundly transformative for me. profoundly transformative for me. My practice of fasting didn't come from My practice of fasting didn't come from My practice of fasting didn't come from reading books, listening to reading books, listening to reading books, listening to sermons, or following a tradition just sermons, or following a tradition just sermons, or following a tradition just because my family happened to have because my family happened to have because my family happened to have observed observed observed it. It came from my own personal it. It came from my own personal it. It came from my own personal experience. During my school experience. During my school experience. During my school days, there was a movement inspired by days, there was a movement inspired by days, there was a movement inspired by Mahatma Gandhi's Mahatma Gandhi's Mahatma Gandhi's vision, his vision of cow protection. vision, his vision of cow protection. vision, his vision of cow protection. The government had not enacted any laws The government had not enacted any laws The government had not enacted any laws at the time. At the time, people across at the time. At the time, people across at the time. At the time, people across the country observed a one-day fast by country observed a one-day fast by country observed a one-day fast by gathering in public places in silent gathering in public places in silent gathering in public places in silent protests. We were just protests. We were just protests. We were just kids, probably had just finished primary kids, probably had just finished primary kids, probably had just finished primary school. Something inside me said, "I school. Something inside me said, "I school. Something inside me said, "I should be part of this." And that was should be part of this." And that was should be part of this." And that was the first time in my life I experienced the first time in my life I experienced the first time in my life I experienced fasting. At such a young fasting. At such a young fasting. At such a young age, I felt neither hunger nor any age, I felt neither hunger nor any age, I felt neither hunger nor any desire for food. Instead, I felt a new desire for food. Instead, I felt a new desire for food. Instead, I felt a new awareness, a surge of energy within awareness, a surge of energy within awareness, a surge of energy within me. So, I became convinced that fasting me. So, I became convinced that fasting me. So, I became convinced that fasting is a is a is a science far beyond just skipping meals. science far beyond just skipping meals. science far beyond just skipping meals. It is something far greater than that. It is something far greater than that. It is something far greater than that. Then gradually I refined my body and mind gradually I refined my body and mind gradually I refined my body and mind through various through various through various experiments. Over time it became a long experiments. Over time it became a long experiments. Over time it became a long and disciplined journey for me. And one thing is certain, fasting me. And one thing is certain, fasting me. And one thing is certain, fasting never slows me never slows me never slows me down. I work just as much as usual. down. I work just as much as usual. down. I work just as much as usual. Sometimes I even work more. Sometimes I even work more. Sometimes I even work more. And another fascinating thing I've And another fascinating thing I've And another fascinating thing I've noticed is noticed is noticed is that when I need to express my that when I need to express my that when I need to express my thoughts, I'm amazed at where they come thoughts, I'm amazed at where they come thoughts, I'm amazed at where they come from and how they flow. from and how they flow. from and how they flow. Yeah. It's truly an incredible Yeah. It's truly an incredible Yeah. It's truly an incredible experience. So you still do meetings experience. So you still do meetings experience. So you still do meetings with world leaders. You still manage the with world leaders. You still manage the with world leaders. You still manage the affairs of India. You still carry out affairs of India. You still carry out affairs of India. You still carry out your role as a leader on the world your role as a leader on the world your role as a leader on the world stage. all fasted and sometimes 9 days. stage. all fasted and sometimes 9 days. stage. all fasted and sometimes 9 days. Well, this practice has a long Well, this practice has a long Well, this practice has a long historical context. I hope it may be historical context. I hope it may be historical context. I hope it may be interesting for those listening. There interesting for those listening. There interesting for those listening. There is an ancient tradition in India called is an ancient tradition in India called is an ancient tradition in India called shaturmas. During the monsoon season, we shaturmas. During the monsoon season, we shaturmas. During the monsoon season, we know that the digestion tends to slow know that the digestion tends to slow know that the digestion tends to slow down. And so in this down. And so in this down. And so in this season, many people in India follow the season, many people in India follow the season, many people in India follow the practice of eating only a single meal practice of eating only a single meal practice of eating only a single meal within 24 hours. For me this starts within 24 hours. For me this starts within 24 hours. For me this starts around mid around mid around mid June and goes on until after Diwali June and goes on until after Diwali June and goes on until after Diwali around around around November for about 4 to 4 and 1/2 November for about 4 to 4 and 1/2 November for about 4 to 4 and 1/2 months. I follow this tradition of months. I follow this tradition of months. I follow this tradition of eating only once in 24 eating only once in 24 eating only once in 24 hours. Then comes the Navatri festival hours. Then comes the Navatri festival hours. Then comes the Navatri festival in India which usually falls in in India which usually falls in in India which usually falls in September or October. September or October. September or October. During this time the whole country During this time the whole country During this time the whole country celebrates Dura Puja, a festival of celebrates Dura Puja, a festival of celebrates Dura Puja, a festival of strength, devotion and spiritual strength, devotion and spiritual strength, devotion and spiritual discipline. This lasts for 9 days. discipline. This lasts for 9 days. discipline. This lasts for 9 days. During this time I completely abstained During this time I completely abstained During this time I completely abstained from food and only drink hot water. from food and only drink hot water. from food and only drink hot water. Although drinking hot water has always Although drinking hot water has always Although drinking hot water has always been a part of my daily routine, my past been a part of my daily routine, my past been a part of my daily routine, my past lifestyle was such that I naturally lifestyle was such that I naturally lifestyle was such that I naturally developed this habit over time. developed this habit over time. developed this habit over time. Then in March or Then in March or Then in March or April, another navatri April, another navatri April, another navatri occurs called chaitra occurs called chaitra occurs called chaitra navatri. This year it will likely begin navatri. This year it will likely begin navatri. This year it will likely begin around March around March around March 31st. During this 9-day fast, I eat only 31st. During this 9-day fast, I eat only 31st. During this 9-day fast, I eat only one specific fruit once a day. one specific fruit once a day. one specific fruit once a day. So for those nine days if let's say I So for those nine days if let's say I So for those nine days if let's say I choose choose choose papaya then for all nine days I won't papaya then for all nine days I won't papaya then for all nine days I won't touch anything else just touch anything else just touch anything else just papaya that too I eat only once a day papaya that too I eat only once a day papaya that too I eat only once a day that's how I follow my 9-day fasting that's how I follow my 9-day fasting that's how I follow my 9-day fasting routine so there are numerous fasts I routine so there are numerous fasts I routine so there are numerous fasts I keep throughout the year and this has keep throughout the year and this has keep throughout the year and this has become a deeply ingrained tradition in become a deeply ingrained tradition in become a deeply ingrained tradition in my my my life perhaps I can say that I've been life perhaps I can say that I've been life perhaps I can say that I've been following these practices for 50 to 55 following these practices for 50 to 55 following these practices for 50 to 55 years. Has there been times when you met years. Has there been times when you met years. Has there been times when you met with a world leader and uh completely with a world leader and uh completely with a world leader and uh completely fasted? And maybe what do they think fasted? And maybe what do they think fasted? And maybe what do they think about that? What do they think about about that? What do they think about about that? What do they think about your ability to do that kind of thing? your ability to do that kind of thing? your ability to do that kind of thing? And and you're right. I should mention And and you're right. I should mention And and you're right. I should mention that uh from even my two days, my that uh from even my two days, my that uh from even my two days, my ability to be present, my ability to ability to be present, my ability to ability to be present, my ability to sense everything sharply focus on this sense everything sharply focus on this sense everything sharply focus on this experience is elevated. But yes, is experience is elevated. But yes, is experience is elevated. But yes, is there stories with the world leader that there stories with the world leader that there stories with the world leader that maybe jumped to mind when you were maybe jumped to mind when you were maybe jumped to mind when you were fasted? Well, most of the time I don't fasted? Well, most of the time I don't fasted? Well, most of the time I don't even let people know about even let people know about even let people know about it. It's my personal matter. So, I never it. It's my personal matter. So, I never it. It's my personal matter. So, I never publicized it. But people gradually publicized it. But people gradually publicized it. But people gradually started finding out. It became known started finding out. It became known started finding out. It became known only after I became chief minister and only after I became chief minister and only after I became chief minister and prime minister. prime minister. prime minister. Otherwise, it was purely personal. Otherwise, it was purely personal. Otherwise, it was purely personal. But now that it's out in the open, I But now that it's out in the open, I But now that it's out in the open, I don't mind sharing. If someone asks, I don't mind sharing. If someone asks, I don't mind sharing. If someone asks, I tell them so it might be useful to them tell them so it might be useful to them tell them so it might be useful to them because it's not my personal property. because it's not my personal property. because it's not my personal property. It's my experience. And if that can help It's my experience. And if that can help It's my experience. And if that can help someone, why not share it? After all, my someone, why not share it? After all, my someone, why not share it? After all, my life has always been devoted to the life has always been devoted to the life has always been devoted to the well-being of others. For example, after well-being of others. For example, after well-being of others. For example, after I became prime minister, I had a I became prime minister, I had a I became prime minister, I had a bilateral bilateral bilateral meeting at the White House with meeting at the White House with meeting at the White House with President Obama and he had also arranged President Obama and he had also arranged President Obama and he had also arranged a formal a formal a formal dinner. Then as discussions between the dinner. Then as discussions between the dinner. Then as discussions between the two governments progressed, someone two governments progressed, someone two governments progressed, someone said, "Please join us for dinner." To said, "Please join us for dinner." To said, "Please join us for dinner." To which another replied, "But the prime which another replied, "But the prime which another replied, "But the prime minister doesn't minister doesn't minister doesn't eat." This left them a bit concerned. eat." This left them a bit concerned. eat." This left them a bit concerned. How do you host the leader of such a How do you host the leader of such a How do you host the leader of such a major nation at the White House without major nation at the White House without major nation at the White House without serving serving serving food? When we sat down, they brought me food? When we sat down, they brought me food? When we sat down, they brought me a glass of hot a glass of hot a glass of hot water. I turned to President Obama and water. I turned to President Obama and water. I turned to President Obama and jokingly said, "Look, my dinner has jokingly said, "Look, my dinner has jokingly said, "Look, my dinner has arrived." As I placed the glass in front arrived." As I placed the glass in front arrived." As I placed the glass in front of of of me. Later, when I visited again, he me. Later, when I visited again, he me. Later, when I visited again, he still still still remembered. He smiled and said, "Last remembered. He smiled and said, "Last remembered. He smiled and said, "Last time you were fasting. This time we're time you were fasting. This time we're time you were fasting. This time we're having lunch. Since you're not fasting, having lunch. Since you're not fasting, having lunch. Since you're not fasting, you'll have to eat twice as much. you'll have to eat twice as much. you'll have to eat twice as much. Let's go to the beginning. You rose from Let's go to the beginning. You rose from Let's go to the beginning. You rose from humble beginnings to lead the world's humble beginnings to lead the world's humble beginnings to lead the world's largest democracy. So I think there's a largest democracy. So I think there's a largest democracy. So I think there's a lot of people for whom this is truly lot of people for whom this is truly lot of people for whom this is truly inspiring. Uh your family was of very inspiring. Uh your family was of very inspiring. Uh your family was of very modest means and you grew up in a one modest means and you grew up in a one modest means and you grew up in a one room house with a mud floor, your whole room house with a mud floor, your whole room house with a mud floor, your whole family living there. Uh tell me about family living there. Uh tell me about family living there. Uh tell me about your childhood. How did those humble your childhood. How did those humble your childhood. How did those humble beginnings shape your outlook on beginnings shape your outlook on beginnings shape your outlook on life? My birthplace is in life? My birthplace is in life? My birthplace is in Gujarat, specifically in North Gujarat Gujarat, specifically in North Gujarat Gujarat, specifically in North Gujarat in Masana in Masana in Masana district in a small town called district in a small town called district in a small town called Wnagar. Historically this town holds Wnagar. Historically this town holds Wnagar. Historically this town holds great great great significance. And so Bodnagar is where I significance. And so Bodnagar is where I significance. And so Bodnagar is where I was born and completed my early was born and completed my early was born and completed my early education. Looking at the world as I understand it today, I can reflect on my childhood and today, I can reflect on my childhood and today, I can reflect on my childhood and the unique environment I grew up in. My village had certain fascinating My village had certain fascinating My village had certain fascinating aspects, some of which are quite rare aspects, some of which are quite rare aspects, some of which are quite rare even globally. When I was in When I was in When I was in school, there was an elder in our school, there was an elder in our school, there was an elder in our village who would village who would village who would regularly tell students, "Listen kids, regularly tell students, "Listen kids, regularly tell students, "Listen kids, wherever you go, if you wherever you go, if you wherever you go, if you find a carved stone or you find a stone find a carved stone or you find a stone find a carved stone or you find a stone with inscriptions on it or anything with with inscriptions on it or anything with with inscriptions on it or anything with engravings, bring it and place it in engravings, bring it and place it in engravings, bring it and place it in this corner of the this corner of the this corner of the pool. Over time, my curiosity grew and I pool. Over time, my curiosity grew and I pool. Over time, my curiosity grew and I started to understand. I realized that started to understand. I realized that started to understand. I realized that my village had a rich and ancient my village had a rich and ancient my village had a rich and ancient history. Discussions at school often history. Discussions at school often history. Discussions at school often revealed more fascinating details about revealed more fascinating details about revealed more fascinating details about its its its past. Later, I learned that China even past. Later, I learned that China even past. Later, I learned that China even made a film about it. I had read in a made a film about it. I had read in a made a film about it. I had read in a newspaper about a film that mentioned newspaper about a film that mentioned newspaper about a film that mentioned the Chinese philosopher Huan Tang who the Chinese philosopher Huan Tang who the Chinese philosopher Huan Tang who had spent a considerable amount of time had spent a considerable amount of time had spent a considerable amount of time in my in my in my village having arrived there many village having arrived there many village having arrived there many centuries centuries centuries ago. Back then it was a major center for ago. Back then it was a major center for ago. Back then it was a major center for Buddhist Buddhist Buddhist learning. That's how I first learned learning. That's how I first learned learning. That's how I first learned about it. about it. about it. And And And perhaps perhaps perhaps around the around the around the 1400s, it was a prominent Buddhist 1400s, it was a prominent Buddhist 1400s, it was a prominent Buddhist educational educational educational hub. There was a victory monument from hub. There was a victory monument from hub. There was a victory monument from the 12th the 12th the 12th century, a temple from the 17th century, a temple from the 17th century, a temple from the 17th century. And in the 16th century, two century. And in the 16th century, two century. And in the 16th century, two sisters Tana and Riri who sisters Tana and Riri who sisters Tana and Riri who were renowned were renowned were renowned musicians. As I uncovered these history musicians. As I uncovered these history musicians. As I uncovered these history traces, I grasped the depth of our traces, I grasped the depth of our traces, I grasped the depth of our heritage. So when I became chief heritage. So when I became chief heritage. So when I became chief minister, I initiated large scale minister, I initiated large scale minister, I initiated large scale excavation excavation excavation projects. The findings from these very projects. The findings from these very projects. The findings from these very projects projects projects confirmed that thousands of Buddhist confirmed that thousands of Buddhist confirmed that thousands of Buddhist monks had at one time studied there. monks had at one time studied there. monks had at one time studied there. It was a place where Buddhist, Jane and It was a place where Buddhist, Jane and It was a place where Buddhist, Jane and Hindu traditions coexisted harmoniously. harmoniously. harmoniously. And for us, history wasn't just confined And for us, history wasn't just confined And for us, history wasn't just confined to books. Every stone books. Every stone books. Every stone spoke. Every wall had a story to tell. spoke. Every wall had a story to tell. spoke. Every wall had a story to tell. And And And so when we began the large scale so when we began the large scale so when we began the large scale excavation excavation excavation work, we uncovered findings that hold work, we uncovered findings that hold work, we uncovered findings that hold immense historical immense historical immense historical significance. So far they have significance. So far they have significance. So far they have discovered evidence dating back 2,800 discovered evidence dating back 2,800 discovered evidence dating back 2,800 years, proving years, proving years, proving that this city has remained unbroken and that this city has remained unbroken and that this city has remained unbroken and eternal for all those 2,800 years. They eternal for all those 2,800 years. They eternal for all those 2,800 years. They have discovered solid proof of how its have discovered solid proof of how its have discovered solid proof of how its development unfolded over these development unfolded over these development unfolded over these centuries. Now an international level centuries. Now an international level centuries. Now an international level museum has been established there open museum has been established there open museum has been established there open to to to visitors especially for archaeology visitors especially for archaeology visitors especially for archaeology students. It has become a major area of students. It has become a major area of students. It has become a major area of study. So the place where I was born study. So the place where I was born study. So the place where I was born holds its own unique historical holds its own unique historical holds its own unique historical significance. I see it as my good significance. I see it as my good significance. I see it as my good fortune. Some things in life unfold fortune. Some things in life unfold fortune. Some things in life unfold beyond our understanding. Kashi became beyond our understanding. Kashi became beyond our understanding. Kashi became my realm of duty. Now Kashi is also my realm of duty. Now Kashi is also my realm of duty. Now Kashi is also eternal. Kashi also known as Banaras or eternal. Kashi also known as Banaras or eternal. Kashi also known as Banaras or Baranasi is an eternal city that Baranasi is an eternal city that Baranasi is an eternal city that has remained vibrant and alive for has remained vibrant and alive for has remained vibrant and alive for centuries. centuries. centuries. Perhaps it was some divine design that Perhaps it was some divine design that Perhaps it was some divine design that led a boy born in Wagar to eventually led a boy born in Wagar to eventually led a boy born in Wagar to eventually make Kashi his realm of duty living in make Kashi his realm of duty living in make Kashi his realm of duty living in the embrace of mother the embrace of mother the embrace of mother Ganga. When I think about my family, my Ganga. When I think about my family, my Ganga. When I think about my family, my father, my mother, my siblings, my father, my mother, my siblings, my father, my mother, my siblings, my uncles, aunts, uncles, aunts, uncles, aunts, grandparents, we all grew up together in grandparents, we all grew up together in grandparents, we all grew up together in a small house. a small house. a small house. The place we lived was likely even The place we lived was likely even The place we lived was likely even smaller than where we are sitting smaller than where we are sitting smaller than where we are sitting now. There was no window, just a small now. There was no window, just a small now. There was no window, just a small door. That's where I was born. That's door. That's where I was born. That's door. That's where I was born. That's where I grew up. Now when people talk about up. Now when people talk about up. Now when people talk about poverty, it's natural to discuss it in poverty, it's natural to discuss it in poverty, it's natural to discuss it in the context of public life. And by those the context of public life. And by those the context of public life. And by those standards, my early life was spent in standards, my early life was spent in standards, my early life was spent in extreme extreme extreme poverty. But we poverty. But we poverty. But we never really felt the burden of never really felt the burden of never really felt the burden of poverty. You see, someone who is used to poverty. You see, someone who is used to poverty. You see, someone who is used to wearing fine wearing fine wearing fine shoes will feel their shoes will feel their shoes will feel their absence when they don't have them. But absence when they don't have them. But absence when they don't have them. But for us, we had never worn shoes in our for us, we had never worn shoes in our for us, we had never worn shoes in our lives. So, how would we even know that lives. So, how would we even know that lives. So, how would we even know that wearing shoes was a big deal? We weren't wearing shoes was a big deal? We weren't wearing shoes was a big deal? We weren't in a position to compare. That's just in a position to compare. That's just in a position to compare. That's just how we lived. Our mother worked how we lived. Our mother worked how we lived. Our mother worked incredibly incredibly incredibly hard. My father, hard. My father, hard. My father, too. He was extremely too. He was extremely too. He was extremely hardworking and he was also extremely hardworking and he was also extremely hardworking and he was also extremely disciplined. disciplined. disciplined. Every morning around 4:00 or 4:30 a.m. Every morning around 4:00 or 4:30 a.m. Every morning around 4:00 or 4:30 a.m. he would leave the house, walk long he would leave the house, walk long he would leave the house, walk long distances, visit several temples, and distances, visit several temples, and distances, visit several temples, and then reach his shop. He wore traditional leather shoes shop. He wore traditional leather shoes shop. He wore traditional leather shoes handmade in the village. The shoes were very tough and village. The shoes were very tough and village. The shoes were very tough and sturdy, making a distinct talk talk sturdy, making a distinct talk talk sturdy, making a distinct talk talk sound when he walked. sound when he walked. sound when he walked. People in the village used to People in the village used to People in the village used to say that they could tell the time just say that they could tell the time just say that they could tell the time just by hearing his footsteps. Oh yes, they by hearing his footsteps. Oh yes, they by hearing his footsteps. Oh yes, they would would would say Mr. Dhamodar is on his way. Such was say Mr. Dhamodar is on his way. Such was say Mr. Dhamodar is on his way. Such was his his his discipline. He worked tirelessly late discipline. He worked tirelessly late discipline. He worked tirelessly late into the night. Our mother too ensured into the night. Our mother too ensured into the night. Our mother too ensured that we never felt the struggles of our that we never felt the struggles of our that we never felt the struggles of our circumstances. But despite But despite But despite everything, these challenging everything, these challenging everything, these challenging circumstances of living in circumstances of living in circumstances of living in scarcity never left a mark on our scarcity never left a mark on our scarcity never left a mark on our minds. I remember in school the idea of minds. I remember in school the idea of minds. I remember in school the idea of wearing shoes never even crossed my wearing shoes never even crossed my wearing shoes never even crossed my mind. One day while I was on my way to mind. One day while I was on my way to mind. One day while I was on my way to school, I ran into my uncle on the school, I ran into my uncle on the school, I ran into my uncle on the way. He saw me and was surprised. way. He saw me and was surprised. way. He saw me and was surprised. Hey, you go to school like this without Hey, you go to school like this without Hey, you go to school like this without shoes. So at that time he bought me a shoes. So at that time he bought me a shoes. So at that time he bought me a pair of canvas shoes and made me wear pair of canvas shoes and made me wear pair of canvas shoes and made me wear them. Back then they must have cost them. Back then they must have cost them. Back then they must have cost around 10 or 12 around 10 or 12 around 10 or 12 rupees. rupees. rupees. But here's the But here's the But here's the thing. They were white canvas shoes and thing. They were white canvas shoes and thing. They were white canvas shoes and they would quickly get stained. So what they would quickly get stained. So what they would quickly get stained. So what did I did I did I do in the do in the do in the evening after school was over? I would evening after school was over? I would evening after school was over? I would stay back for a stay back for a stay back for a while. I would go from classroom to while. I would go from classroom to while. I would go from classroom to classroom collecting leftover pieces of classroom collecting leftover pieces of classroom collecting leftover pieces of chalk that the teachers had discarded. chalk that the teachers had discarded. chalk that the teachers had discarded. I would take the pieces of chalk I would take the pieces of chalk I would take the pieces of chalk home, soak them in home, soak them in home, soak them in water, mix them into a paste, and polish water, mix them into a paste, and polish water, mix them into a paste, and polish my canvas shoes with it, making them my canvas shoes with it, making them my canvas shoes with it, making them bright white bright white bright white again. For me, those shoes were a again. For me, those shoes were a again. For me, those shoes were a treasured possession, a symbol of great treasured possession, a symbol of great treasured possession, a symbol of great wealth. And I don't exactly know why, wealth. And I don't exactly know why, wealth. And I don't exactly know why, but from but from but from childhood, our mother was extremely childhood, our mother was extremely childhood, our mother was extremely particular about particular about particular about cleanliness. Perhaps that's where we cleanliness. Perhaps that's where we cleanliness. Perhaps that's where we inherited that habit, inherited that habit, inherited that habit, too. Not sure how I picked up the habit too. Not sure how I picked up the habit too. Not sure how I picked up the habit of dressing neatly, but it's been there of dressing neatly, but it's been there of dressing neatly, but it's been there since childhood. Whatever I wore, I made since childhood. Whatever I wore, I made since childhood. Whatever I wore, I made sure it looked sure it looked sure it looked proper. Back then, as you can imagine, proper. Back then, as you can imagine, proper. Back then, as you can imagine, we didn't have any arrangements for we didn't have any arrangements for we didn't have any arrangements for ironing ironing ironing clothes. So, instead, I would heat up clothes. So, instead, I would heat up clothes. So, instead, I would heat up water in a copper water in a copper water in a copper pot, hold it with tongs, and press my pot, hold it with tongs, and press my pot, hold it with tongs, and press my clothes myself. clothes myself. clothes myself. Then I'd head off to school. That's how Then I'd head off to school. That's how Then I'd head off to school. That's how I lived. And I found joy in it. We never I lived. And I found joy in it. We never I lived. And I found joy in it. We never thought about being poor or judged about thought about being poor or judged about thought about being poor or judged about how others lived or what their struggles how others lived or what their struggles how others lived or what their struggles were. We lived were. We lived were. We lived carefree, enjoying whatever little we carefree, enjoying whatever little we carefree, enjoying whatever little we had and kept working hard. Never once had and kept working hard. Never once had and kept working hard. Never once did we complain about these things. And did we complain about these things. And did we complain about these things. And all these aspects of my life whether you all these aspects of my life whether you all these aspects of my life whether you call it fortune or call it fortune or call it fortune or misfortune unfolded in such a way in misfortune unfolded in such a way in misfortune unfolded in such a way in politics that they started coming to politics that they started coming to politics that they started coming to light because when I was taking my oath light because when I was taking my oath light because when I was taking my oath as chief as chief as chief minister TV reporters went to my village minister TV reporters went to my village minister TV reporters went to my village questioned my childhood friends went to questioned my childhood friends went to questioned my childhood friends went to capture videos of my home that's when capture videos of my home that's when capture videos of my home that's when people started asking who is this and people started asking who is this and people started asking who is this and what background he is coming from. what background he is coming from. what background he is coming from. Before that, very few knew much about my Before that, very few knew much about my Before that, very few knew much about my life. That's just how my journey has life. That's just how my journey has life. That's just how my journey has been. My mother possessed an innate been. My mother possessed an innate been. My mother possessed an innate spirit of caring for others spirit of caring for others spirit of caring for others well-being. It was woven into the very well-being. It was woven into the very well-being. It was woven into the very fabric of her fabric of her fabric of her being. She possessed knowledge of being. She possessed knowledge of being. She possessed knowledge of traditional remedies and healing traditional remedies and healing traditional remedies and healing practices and would treat children with practices and would treat children with practices and would treat children with these home remedies. Every morning these home remedies. Every morning these home remedies. Every morning before sunrise around 5:00 she would before sunrise around 5:00 she would before sunrise around 5:00 she would start treating start treating start treating them. So all the children and their them. So all the children and their them. So all the children and their parents would gather at our home little parents would gather at our home little parents would gather at our home little children crying and we had to wake up children crying and we had to wake up children crying and we had to wake up early because of early because of early because of it. Meanwhile, my mother would continue it. Meanwhile, my mother would continue it. Meanwhile, my mother would continue treating them with care. This spirit of treating them with care. This spirit of treating them with care. This spirit of service in a way was nurtured through service in a way was nurtured through service in a way was nurtured through these experiences. A sense of empathy these experiences. A sense of empathy these experiences. A sense of empathy for society, the desire to do good for for society, the desire to do good for for society, the desire to do good for others. These values were instilled in others. These values were instilled in others. These values were instilled in me from my family. I believe that my life has been family. I believe that my life has been family. I believe that my life has been shaped by my mother, my father, my shaped by my mother, my father, my shaped by my mother, my father, my teachers, and the environment I grew up teachers, and the environment I grew up teachers, and the environment I grew up in. There's a lot of young people in. There's a lot of young people in. There's a lot of young people listening to this that are truly listening to this that are truly listening to this that are truly inspired by your story. from those inspired by your story. from those inspired by your story. from those humble beginnings to the leader of the humble beginnings to the leader of the humble beginnings to the leader of the biggest democracy in the world. Uh what biggest democracy in the world. Uh what biggest democracy in the world. Uh what can you tell to those young folks who can you tell to those young folks who can you tell to those young folks who are struggling, who are lost in the are struggling, who are lost in the are struggling, who are lost in the world, who are trying to find their way? world, who are trying to find their way? world, who are trying to find their way? What advice could you give them? I want What advice could you give them? I want What advice could you give them? I want to tell all the young people the to tell all the young people the to tell all the young people the following. No matter How dark the night may seem, it is still just seem, it is still just seem, it is still just night and morning is bound to come. That's why we need patience and why we need patience and why we need patience and self-confidence. Yes, the challenges are self-confidence. Yes, the challenges are self-confidence. Yes, the challenges are real, but I am not defined by my real, but I am not defined by my real, but I am not defined by my circumstances. circumstances. circumstances. I am here for a purpose sent by a higher I am here for a purpose sent by a higher I am here for a purpose sent by a higher power and I am not alone. The one who power and I am not alone. The one who power and I am not alone. The one who sent me is always with me. This sent me is always with me. This sent me is always with me. This unwavering faith should always remain unwavering faith should always remain unwavering faith should always remain within us. Difficulties are a test of within us. Difficulties are a test of within us. Difficulties are a test of endurance. They are not meant to defeat endurance. They are not meant to defeat endurance. They are not meant to defeat me. Hardships exist to make me stronger, me. Hardships exist to make me stronger, me. Hardships exist to make me stronger, helping me grow and improve, not to helping me grow and improve, not to helping me grow and improve, not to leave me feeling hopeless or leave me feeling hopeless or leave me feeling hopeless or discouraged. discouraged. discouraged. Personally, I see every crisis, every Personally, I see every crisis, every Personally, I see every crisis, every challenge as an opportunity. So to all challenge as an opportunity. So to all challenge as an opportunity. So to all young people, I say have patience. There young people, I say have patience. There young people, I say have patience. There are no shortcuts in life. At our railway are no shortcuts in life. At our railway are no shortcuts in life. At our railway stations, there hangs a stations, there hangs a stations, there hangs a sign. For those who habitually cross the sign. For those who habitually cross the sign. For those who habitually cross the tracks instead of using the bridge, it tracks instead of using the bridge, it tracks instead of using the bridge, it reads, "Shortcut will cut you short." I reads, "Shortcut will cut you short." I reads, "Shortcut will cut you short." I would tell young people the same. would tell young people the same. would tell young people the same. Shortcut will cut you short. There are Shortcut will cut you short. There are Shortcut will cut you short. There are no shortcuts in life. Patience and no shortcuts in life. Patience and no shortcuts in life. Patience and perseverance are perseverance are perseverance are essential. Whatever responsibility we essential. Whatever responsibility we essential. Whatever responsibility we are given, we must pour our heart into are given, we must pour our heart into are given, we must pour our heart into it. We should live it with passion, it. We should live it with passion, it. We should live it with passion, enjoy the journey and find fulfillment enjoy the journey and find fulfillment enjoy the journey and find fulfillment in it. I truly believe that if this in it. I truly believe that if this in it. I truly believe that if this mindset is cultivated, it transforms mindset is cultivated, it transforms mindset is cultivated, it transforms life. Similarly, abundance alone is not life. Similarly, abundance alone is not life. Similarly, abundance alone is not enough. There is no guarantee of enough. There is no guarantee of enough. There is no guarantee of success. Even a wealthy person who success. Even a wealthy person who success. Even a wealthy person who indulges in comfort and idleness will indulges in comfort and idleness will indulges in comfort and idleness will eventually wither away. Instead, he must eventually wither away. Instead, he must eventually wither away. Instead, he must decide, "Yes, I may have resources decide, "Yes, I may have resources decide, "Yes, I may have resources around me, but I must use my abilities around me, but I must use my abilities around me, but I must use my abilities to grow them to grow them to grow them further. I must contribute more to further. I must contribute more to further. I must contribute more to society with my own strength. Even if I society with my own strength. Even if I society with my own strength. Even if I am in a good position, there is still so am in a good position, there is still so am in a good position, there is still so much more to do. Even if I am not in a much more to do. Even if I am not in a much more to do. Even if I am not in a good position, there is still so much good position, there is still so much good position, there is still so much work to do. That's what I believe. I work to do. That's what I believe. I work to do. That's what I believe. I have also noticed that some people tend have also noticed that some people tend have also noticed that some people tend to think I've learned enough that's to think I've learned enough that's to think I've learned enough that's it. But one should never let the student it. But one should never let the student it. But one should never let the student within them within them within them die. Learning should never stop. I die. Learning should never stop. I die. Learning should never stop. I believe that as long as I am alive, I believe that as long as I am alive, I believe that as long as I am alive, I must have a must have a must have a purpose. Perhaps I purpose. Perhaps I purpose. Perhaps I exist to keep learning, to keep exist to keep learning, to keep exist to keep learning, to keep growing. Now my mother growing. Now my mother growing. Now my mother tongue is tongue is tongue is Gujarati Gujarati Gujarati and and and we were not very familiar with the Hindi language. Nor did we know how to speak language. Nor did we know how to speak language. Nor did we know how to speak it eloquently or communicate it eloquently or communicate it eloquently or communicate effectively. effectively. effectively. But as a child I used to sit at my But as a child I used to sit at my But as a child I used to sit at my father's tea shop and at that young age father's tea shop and at that young age father's tea shop and at that young age I got the chance to meet so many I got the chance to meet so many I got the chance to meet so many people and every time I learned people and every time I learned people and every time I learned something from them I observed their something from them I observed their something from them I observed their ways of speaking their expressions these ways of speaking their expressions these ways of speaking their expressions these things taught me a lot even though I things taught me a lot even though I things taught me a lot even though I wasn't in a position to apply it then I wasn't in a position to apply it then I wasn't in a position to apply it then I thought if I ever get the chance why not thought if I ever get the chance why not thought if I ever get the chance why not why shouldn't I present myself well so I why shouldn't I present myself well so I why shouldn't I present myself well so I believe the desire to learn should believe the desire to learn should believe the desire to learn should always remain always remain always remain alive. And alive. And alive. And um another thing I've observed is that um another thing I've observed is that um another thing I've observed is that most people dream about achieving people dream about achieving people dream about achieving something or becoming someone. They set something or becoming someone. They set something or becoming someone. They set big big big targets and when they fall targets and when they fall targets and when they fall short they feel disappointed. That's why disappointed. That's why disappointed. That's why Whenever I get a chance to talk to my Whenever I get a chance to talk to my Whenever I get a chance to talk to my friends, I tell them instead of dreaming about getting them instead of dreaming about getting them instead of dreaming about getting and becoming, dream of doing and becoming, dream of doing and becoming, dream of doing something, if you focus on doing something, if you focus on doing something, if you focus on doing something and let's say your goal is to something and let's say your goal is to something and let's say your goal is to reach 10, but you make it to eight, you reach 10, but you make it to eight, you reach 10, but you make it to eight, you won't feel discouraged. You'll still won't feel discouraged. You'll still won't feel discouraged. You'll still work toward 10 with determination. work toward 10 with determination. work toward 10 with determination. But if your dream is only to become But if your dream is only to become But if your dream is only to become something and it doesn't happen, even something and it doesn't happen, even something and it doesn't happen, even your achievements may feel like a your achievements may feel like a your achievements may feel like a burden. That's why we must adjust our burden. That's why we must adjust our burden. That's why we must adjust our mindset in life. Instead of thinking mindset in life. Instead of thinking mindset in life. Instead of thinking about what I got or didn't get, the about what I got or didn't get, the about what I got or didn't get, the mindset should be what can I mindset should be what can I mindset should be what can I give? Because true contentment doesn't give? Because true contentment doesn't give? Because true contentment doesn't bloom on its own. It grows from the depth of what you own. It grows from the depth of what you own. It grows from the depth of what you give. give. give. And I should say that this young kid, And I should say that this young kid, And I should say that this young kid, one of the things I dreamed of doing is one of the things I dreamed of doing is one of the things I dreamed of doing is to do this very thing to talk to you to do this very thing to talk to you to do this very thing to talk to you today. So this is uh very surreal. At today. So this is uh very surreal. At today. So this is uh very surreal. At 17, another fascinating part of your 17, another fascinating part of your 17, another fascinating part of your life. You left home and spent two years life. You left home and spent two years life. You left home and spent two years roaming in the Himalayas searching for roaming in the Himalayas searching for roaming in the Himalayas searching for purpose, for deeper truth, for God. Uh purpose, for deeper truth, for God. Uh purpose, for deeper truth, for God. Uh so not much is known about this period so not much is known about this period so not much is known about this period of your life. You lived a nomatic of your life. You lived a nomatic of your life. You lived a nomatic minimalist existence very much like a minimalist existence very much like a minimalist existence very much like a yogi often sleeping without a roof over yogi often sleeping without a roof over yogi often sleeping without a roof over your head. Uh what are some memorable your head. Uh what are some memorable your head. Uh what are some memorable spiritual moments, rituals, experiences spiritual moments, rituals, experiences spiritual moments, rituals, experiences from that from that from that time? It seems like you've put in a lot time? It seems like you've put in a lot time? It seems like you've put in a lot of effort. Look, I look I don't usually talk much about I look I don't usually talk much about I look I don't usually talk much about this but I can share a few external this but I can share a few external this but I can share a few external aspects of it. I grew up in a very small it. I grew up in a very small it. I grew up in a very small town. Our life was all about being part town. Our life was all about being part town. Our life was all about being part of a community. We lived among people community. We lived among people community. We lived among people surrounded by them. That was just how surrounded by them. That was just how surrounded by them. That was just how life life life was. There was a library in the village was. There was a library in the village was. There was a library in the village and I used to go there often to read books. Whenever I read something from books. Whenever I read something from books. Whenever I read something from the books, I often found myself feeling the books, I often found myself feeling the books, I often found myself feeling inspired thinking why shouldn't I shape my own thinking why shouldn't I shape my own thinking why shouldn't I shape my own life like that? That desire was always life like that? That desire was always life like that? That desire was always there. When I used to read about Swami there. When I used to read about Swami there. When I used to read about Swami Viveanandha or read about Chhatrapati Viveanandha or read about Chhatrapati Viveanandha or read about Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj, I would often wonder Shivaji Maharaj, I would often wonder Shivaji Maharaj, I would often wonder how did they live? How did they build how did they live? How did they build how did they live? How did they build such remarkable lives? And for that I such remarkable lives? And for that I such remarkable lives? And for that I constantly experimented on constantly experimented on constantly experimented on myself. Most of my experiments were myself. Most of my experiments were myself. Most of my experiments were physical in nature, testing my body's physical in nature, testing my body's physical in nature, testing my body's limits. limits. limits. For example, where I lived, winters For example, where I lived, winters For example, where I lived, winters weren't too harsh, but December nights weren't too harsh, but December nights weren't too harsh, but December nights could get quite could get quite could get quite cold, cold, cold, but but but still at night the cold would bite. It was night the cold would bite. It was night the cold would bite. It was natural. natural. natural. So So So sometimes I would decide to sleep sometimes I would decide to sleep sometimes I would decide to sleep outside in the open with nothing to outside in the open with nothing to outside in the open with nothing to cover myself just to see how my body cover myself just to see how my body cover myself just to see how my body endures the cold. So from a very young endures the cold. So from a very young endures the cold. So from a very young age I would often experiment with my age I would often experiment with my age I would often experiment with my body and uh this became a regular thing body and uh this became a regular thing body and uh this became a regular thing for me. for me. for me. For For For me, going to the me, going to the me, going to the library, reading library, reading library, reading extensively, visiting the extensively, visiting the extensively, visiting the pond, washing the family's clothes, and pond, washing the family's clothes, and pond, washing the family's clothes, and swimming became part of my routine. swimming became part of my routine. swimming became part of my routine. Swimming was my main physical Swimming was my main physical Swimming was my main physical activity. All of these things were activity. All of these things were activity. All of these things were deeply connected to my deeply connected to my deeply connected to my life. Later, as I read Viveanand, I life. Later, as I read Viveanand, I life. Later, as I read Viveanand, I became even more drawn to his teachings. One time I read about Swami One time I read about Swami One time I read about Swami Viveanand his mother was Viveanand his mother was Viveanand his mother was ill. ill. ill. So he went to Sri Ram Krishna Paramahans So he went to Sri Ram Krishna Paramahans So he went to Sri Ram Krishna Paramahans for for for guidance he would argue with him debate guidance he would argue with him debate guidance he would argue with him debate with with with him. In his early days, he would often argue with days, he would often argue with days, he would often argue with him, questioning everything intellectually. He said, "My mother is intellectually. He said, "My mother is intellectually. He said, "My mother is sick. If I were earning, I could take sick. If I were earning, I could take sick. If I were earning, I could take better care of better care of better care of her." Sri Ram Krishna said, "Don't her." Sri Ram Krishna said, "Don't her." Sri Ram Krishna said, "Don't bother me with all this. Go to Goddess bother me with all this. Go to Goddess bother me with all this. Go to Goddess Kali. She is there. Ask her for what you need. And need. And need. And so Swami Viveanand went and sat before so Swami Viveanand went and sat before so Swami Viveanand went and sat before Goddess Kali's idol for hours and he Goddess Kali's idol for hours and he Goddess Kali's idol for hours and he immersed immersed immersed himself into deep himself into deep himself into deep meditation. After a few hours when he meditation. After a few hours when he meditation. After a few hours when he returned Ramach Krishna asked him, "So returned Ramach Krishna asked him, "So returned Ramach Krishna asked him, "So did you request the goddess?" Swami did you request the goddess?" Swami did you request the goddess?" Swami Vivean replied, "No, I didn't." Ramach Vivean replied, "No, I didn't." Ramach Vivean replied, "No, I didn't." Ramach Krishna said go again Krishna said go again Krishna said go again tomorrow. She will fulfill your request. tomorrow. She will fulfill your request. tomorrow. She will fulfill your request. Ask her. He went the next day and then Ask her. He went the next day and then Ask her. He went the next day and then again the day again the day again the day after. But each time he found himself unable to ask for anything. His himself unable to ask for anything. His himself unable to ask for anything. His mother was unwell and he needed help. mother was unwell and he needed help. mother was unwell and he needed help. But when he sat before goddess Kali, he But when he sat before goddess Kali, he But when he sat before goddess Kali, he was completely absorbed in her was completely absorbed in her was completely absorbed in her presence. And yet he could not bring presence. And yet he could not bring presence. And yet he could not bring himself to ask for anything. Each time himself to ask for anything. Each time himself to ask for anything. Each time he returned empty-handed. He told Sri he returned empty-handed. He told Sri he returned empty-handed. He told Sri Ramak Krishna, "I came back Ramak Krishna, "I came back Ramak Krishna, "I came back empty-handed. I didn't ask for empty-handed. I didn't ask for empty-handed. I didn't ask for anything." To stand before the divine anything." To stand before the divine anything." To stand before the divine goddess and not be able to ask for goddess and not be able to ask for goddess and not be able to ask for anything. anything. anything. That moment, that experience lit a flame That moment, that experience lit a flame That moment, that experience lit a flame inside inside inside him. There was a spark in his him. There was a spark in his him. There was a spark in his life and from life and from life and from that came the spirit of giving. I believe that perhaps on me on me on me too. The thought of what can I give to too. The thought of what can I give to too. The thought of what can I give to the world? Maybe true contentment comes from world? Maybe true contentment comes from world? Maybe true contentment comes from giving. If my heart is only filled with giving. If my heart is only filled with giving. If my heart is only filled with the hunger to receive, that hunger will the hunger to receive, that hunger will the hunger to receive, that hunger will never end. And within that realization came end. And within that realization came end. And within that realization came the idea of Shiva and living being as the idea of Shiva and living being as the idea of Shiva and living being as one. one. one. If you wish to serve Shiva, serve all If you wish to serve Shiva, serve all If you wish to serve Shiva, serve all living living living beings, recognize the unity between the beings, recognize the unity between the beings, recognize the unity between the divine and the living. True non-duality divine and the living. True non-duality divine and the living. True non-duality is experienced through this is experienced through this is experienced through this realization. I would often lose myself realization. I would often lose myself realization. I would often lose myself in such in such in such thoughts. My mind naturally drifting in thoughts. My mind naturally drifting in thoughts. My mind naturally drifting in that direction. that direction. that direction. I remember an I remember an I remember an incident in the neighborhood where we incident in the neighborhood where we incident in the neighborhood where we lived just lived just lived just outside. There was a Lord Shiva outside. There was a Lord Shiva outside. There was a Lord Shiva temple. One day a saint came to stay temple. One day a saint came to stay temple. One day a saint came to stay there. So that saint used to engage there. So that saint used to engage there. So that saint used to engage in meditation and spiritual practices. I in meditation and spiritual practices. I in meditation and spiritual practices. I started feeling drawn to him thinking started feeling drawn to him thinking started feeling drawn to him thinking perhaps he possessed some spiritual perhaps he possessed some spiritual perhaps he possessed some spiritual energy. I had only read about Swami energy. I had only read about Swami energy. I had only read about Swami Viveanand never seen such figures in Viveanand never seen such figures in Viveanand never seen such figures in real real real life. During Navatri he was fasting and life. During Navatri he was fasting and life. During Navatri he was fasting and he had placed sorghum grains on his he had placed sorghum grains on his he had placed sorghum grains on his hand. A common tradition in our hand. A common tradition in our hand. A common tradition in our culture in a way sprouting seeds on your culture in a way sprouting seeds on your culture in a way sprouting seeds on your palms and sleeping like that for 9 or 10 palms and sleeping like that for 9 or 10 palms and sleeping like that for 9 or 10 days. It was a kind of spiritual bow and days. It was a kind of spiritual bow and days. It was a kind of spiritual bow and this saint was observing it during those this saint was observing it during those this saint was observing it during those same days. same days. same days. My maternal uncle's family was preparing My maternal uncle's family was preparing My maternal uncle's family was preparing for my aunt's wedding. Everyone from my for my aunt's wedding. Everyone from my for my aunt's wedding. Everyone from my home was going to my uncle's house for home was going to my uncle's house for home was going to my uncle's house for the the the wedding. Now for any child, visiting an wedding. Now for any child, visiting an wedding. Now for any child, visiting an uncle's house is always exciting. But I uncle's house is always exciting. But I uncle's house is always exciting. But I told my family, I'm not going. I'll stay told my family, I'm not going. I'll stay told my family, I'm not going. I'll stay here and I will take care of Swami G. here and I will take care of Swami G. here and I will take care of Swami G. Since he has these grains on his hand, Since he has these grains on his hand, Since he has these grains on his hand, he can't eat or drink. So I will take he can't eat or drink. So I will take he can't eat or drink. So I will take care of him. So as a child, I chose not care of him. So as a child, I chose not care of him. So as a child, I chose not to attend the wedding. I stayed back to attend the wedding. I stayed back to attend the wedding. I stayed back serving Swami G instead. Somehow my mind serving Swami G instead. Somehow my mind serving Swami G instead. Somehow my mind was naturally drawn in that was naturally drawn in that was naturally drawn in that direction. At times whenever soldiers direction. At times whenever soldiers direction. At times whenever soldiers from my village came home during their from my village came home during their from my village came home during their holidays, they would walk around in holidays, they would walk around in holidays, they would walk around in their uniforms with such pride. I would their uniforms with such pride. I would their uniforms with such pride. I would run behind them all day thinking, "Look run behind them all day thinking, "Look run behind them all day thinking, "Look at them. They are serving the nation." at them. They are serving the nation." at them. They are serving the nation." So there was always a strong feeling So there was always a strong feeling So there was always a strong feeling inside me to do something meaningful. I inside me to do something meaningful. I inside me to do something meaningful. I didn't fully understand what it would didn't fully understand what it would didn't fully understand what it would be and I didn't have a road map. There be and I didn't have a road map. There be and I didn't have a road map. There was a hunger within me, a deep longing was a hunger within me, a deep longing was a hunger within me, a deep longing to understand life, to explore its to understand life, to explore its to understand life, to explore its meaning. So I just set out and began the meaning. So I just set out and began the meaning. So I just set out and began the journey. During my time in the journey. During my time in the journey. During my time in the mission, I came across remarkable mission, I came across remarkable mission, I came across remarkable saints. They showered me with love and saints. They showered me with love and saints. They showered me with love and blessings. Among them, I formed a blessings. Among them, I formed a blessings. Among them, I formed a special bond with Swami Atmastan G. He special bond with Swami Atmastan G. He special bond with Swami Atmastan G. He lived for nearly 100 years a life full lived for nearly 100 years a life full lived for nearly 100 years a life full of wisdom and service. In his final of wisdom and service. In his final of wisdom and service. In his final years, I deeply wished for him to stay years, I deeply wished for him to stay years, I deeply wished for him to stay with me at the prime minister's with me at the prime minister's with me at the prime minister's residence. But his responsibilities were residence. But his responsibilities were residence. But his responsibilities were vast and he couldn't come. However, back vast and he couldn't come. However, back vast and he couldn't come. However, back when I was chief minister, he used to when I was chief minister, he used to when I was chief minister, he used to visit and I was fortunate to receive his visit and I was fortunate to receive his visit and I was fortunate to receive his blessings and guidance. He once looked blessings and guidance. He once looked blessings and guidance. He once looked at me and said, "Why have you come here? You have said, "Why have you come here? You have said, "Why have you come here? You have a greater purpose to a greater purpose to a greater purpose to fulfill. Is your priority your own fulfill. Is your priority your own fulfill. Is your priority your own well-being or is it the welfare of well-being or is it the welfare of well-being or is it the welfare of society? Whatever Swami Viveanandan said society? Whatever Swami Viveanandan said society? Whatever Swami Viveanandan said was for the betterment of was for the betterment of was for the betterment of society. He said you are meant to serve society. He said you are meant to serve society. He said you are meant to serve others. So others. So others. So I I remember feeling a bit disheartened I I remember feeling a bit disheartened I I remember feeling a bit disheartened at that moment. I had come seeking at that moment. I had come seeking at that moment. I had come seeking guidance but all I got were words. guidance but all I got were words. guidance but all I got were words. So I continued on my journey wandering So I continued on my journey wandering So I continued on my journey wandering from place to place. I spent time in the from place to place. I spent time in the from place to place. I spent time in the Himalayas embracing the solitude of the Himalayas embracing the solitude of the Himalayas embracing the solitude of the mountains. I met many remarkable mountains. I met many remarkable mountains. I met many remarkable individuals along the way. Some were individuals along the way. Some were individuals along the way. Some were great aesthetics, people who had great aesthetics, people who had great aesthetics, people who had renounced renounced renounced everything. But still my mind remained everything. But still my mind remained everything. But still my mind remained restless. Perhaps it was my age of restless. Perhaps it was my age of restless. Perhaps it was my age of curiosity of wanting to learn to curiosity of wanting to learn to curiosity of wanting to learn to understand. understand. understand. It was a new It was a new It was a new experience, a world shaped by the experience, a world shaped by the experience, a world shaped by the mountains, by ice, by the towering mountains, by ice, by the towering mountains, by ice, by the towering snow-covered peaks. But all of this snow-covered peaks. But all of this snow-covered peaks. But all of this played a huge role in shaping played a huge role in shaping played a huge role in shaping me. It strengthened me from within and me. It strengthened me from within and me. It strengthened me from within and enabled me to discover my inner power. enabled me to discover my inner power. enabled me to discover my inner power. practicing meditation, waking up in the practicing meditation, waking up in the practicing meditation, waking up in the sacred pre-dawn hours, bathing in the sacred pre-dawn hours, bathing in the sacred pre-dawn hours, bathing in the cold, serving people with devotion and cold, serving people with devotion and cold, serving people with devotion and naturally tending to elderly saints naturally tending to elderly saints naturally tending to elderly saints became a seamless part of who I became a seamless part of who I became a seamless part of who I was. Once a natural calamity struck the was. Once a natural calamity struck the was. Once a natural calamity struck the region, and I immediately devoted myself region, and I immediately devoted myself region, and I immediately devoted myself to helping the villages. So these were to helping the villages. So these were to helping the villages. So these were the saints and spiritual masters with the saints and spiritual masters with the saints and spiritual masters with whom I stayed from time to time. whom I stayed from time to time. whom I stayed from time to time. I never remained in one place for long. I never remained in one place for long. I never remained in one place for long. I kept moving, constantly I kept moving, constantly I kept moving, constantly wandering. That was the kind of life I wandering. That was the kind of life I wandering. That was the kind of life I lived. And for people who don't know lived. And for people who don't know lived. And for people who don't know that moment in the Ramach Krishna that moment in the Ramach Krishna that moment in the Ramach Krishna mission ashram with uh with the monk mission ashram with uh with the monk mission ashram with uh with the monk Swami Admashananda as you mentioned, he Swami Admashananda as you mentioned, he Swami Admashananda as you mentioned, he helped steer you towards a life of helped steer you towards a life of helped steer you towards a life of service. So there's another possible service. So there's another possible service. So there's another possible life that could have been where you take life that could have been where you take life that could have been where you take Syasa, you give away everything and Syasa, you give away everything and Syasa, you give away everything and you're a monk. So we could have had a you're a monk. So we could have had a you're a monk. So we could have had a monk Narendra Modi and a prime minister monk Narendra Modi and a prime minister monk Narendra Modi and a prime minister Narendra Modi and he helped you take the Narendra Modi and he helped you take the Narendra Modi and he helped you take the decision to live a life of service at decision to live a life of service at decision to live a life of service at every every every scale. From the outside people may call scale. From the outside people may call scale. From the outside people may call me a leader, some call me the prime me a leader, some call me the prime me a leader, some call me the prime minister, others call me the chief minister, others call me the chief minister, others call me the chief minister. And that's how they see me minister. And that's how they see me minister. And that's how they see me from their perspective. But deep within there is perspective. But deep within there is perspective. But deep within there is only an unwavering spiritual only an unwavering spiritual only an unwavering spiritual commitment. The Modi who lovingly helped commitment. The Modi who lovingly helped commitment. The Modi who lovingly helped his mother care for children during his mother care for children during his mother care for children during their treatments, tending to them with their treatments, tending to them with their treatments, tending to them with patience and compassion. The Modi who wandered through the The Modi who wandered through the The Modi who wandered through the Himalayas and the Modi who now works Himalayas and the Modi who now works Himalayas and the Modi who now works from this seat of from this seat of from this seat of responsibility. They are all tied responsibility. They are all tied responsibility. They are all tied together by the same inner together by the same inner together by the same inner consistency. Every action is dedicated consistency. Every action is dedicated consistency. Every action is dedicated to serving to serving to serving others. People may see a stark others. People may see a stark others. People may see a stark difference between a saint and a leader, difference between a saint and a leader, difference between a saint and a leader, but to me there is no real difference. but to me there is no real difference. but to me there is no real difference. Yes, the attire changes, the way of life Yes, the attire changes, the way of life Yes, the attire changes, the way of life changes, the words spoken throughout the changes, the words spoken throughout the changes, the words spoken throughout the day shift and the nature of work day shift and the nature of work day shift and the nature of work evolves, but the core of my being evolves, but the core of my being evolves, but the core of my being remains unchanged. Carrying out every remains unchanged. Carrying out every remains unchanged. Carrying out every responsibility with the same sense of responsibility with the same sense of responsibility with the same sense of calm focus and dedication. Another part calm focus and dedication. Another part calm focus and dedication. Another part of your life of who you are is you've of your life of who you are is you've of your life of who you are is you've spoken your whole life about putting spoken your whole life about putting spoken your whole life about putting your nation of India above all else. your nation of India above all else. your nation of India above all else. When you were eight, you joined the RSS When you were eight, you joined the RSS When you were eight, you joined the RSS which espouses the idea of Hindu which espouses the idea of Hindu which espouses the idea of Hindu nationalism. Can you tell me about RSS nationalism. Can you tell me about RSS nationalism. Can you tell me about RSS and what impact they had and what impact they had and what impact they had on who you are and the development of on who you are and the development of on who you are and the development of your political your political your political ideas? Ever since childhood, I always had the habit of childhood, I always had the habit of childhood, I always had the habit of staying engaged in something or the staying engaged in something or the staying engaged in something or the other. I remember there was a man named other. I remember there was a man named other. I remember there was a man named Makoshi. Makoshi. Makoshi. I don't quite recall his full name. I I don't quite recall his full name. I I don't quite recall his full name. I think he was part of the service group think he was part of the service group think he was part of the service group Makoshi Sony or something like Makoshi Sony or something like Makoshi Sony or something like that. He used to carry a small drumlike that. He used to carry a small drumlike that. He used to carry a small drumlike instrument called the tambourine with instrument called the tambourine with instrument called the tambourine with him. And he used to sing patriotic songs him. And he used to sing patriotic songs him. And he used to sing patriotic songs in his deep powerful voice. Whenever he in his deep powerful voice. Whenever he in his deep powerful voice. Whenever he came to our village, he would hold came to our village, he would hold came to our village, he would hold programs in different places. I would programs in different places. I would programs in different places. I would run after him like a crazy fan just to run after him like a crazy fan just to run after him like a crazy fan just to listen to his songs. listen to his songs. listen to his songs. I would spend entire nights listening to I would spend entire nights listening to I would spend entire nights listening to their patriotic songs. I enjoyed it. I their patriotic songs. I enjoyed it. I their patriotic songs. I enjoyed it. I don't even know why, but I just did. In don't even know why, but I just did. In don't even know why, but I just did. In our village, there was a branch of the our village, there was a branch of the our village, there was a branch of the Rashtria sang where we played sports and Rashtria sang where we played sports and Rashtria sang where we played sports and sang patriotic songs. Something about sang patriotic songs. Something about sang patriotic songs. Something about those songs touched me deeply. They those songs touched me deeply. They those songs touched me deeply. They stirred something inside me and that's stirred something inside me and that's stirred something inside me and that's how I eventually became part of the RSS. how I eventually became part of the RSS. how I eventually became part of the RSS. One of the core values that were One of the core values that were One of the core values that were instilled in us at RSS instilled in us at RSS instilled in us at RSS was whatever you do, do it with a was whatever you do, do it with a was whatever you do, do it with a purpose. Even while studying, study with purpose. Even while studying, study with purpose. Even while studying, study with the goal of learning enough to the goal of learning enough to the goal of learning enough to contribute to the contribute to the contribute to the nation. Even when you exercise, do it nation. Even when you exercise, do it nation. Even when you exercise, do it with the purpose of strengthening your with the purpose of strengthening your with the purpose of strengthening your body to serve the nation. This is what body to serve the nation. This is what body to serve the nation. This is what we were taught. And today, RSS is a we were taught. And today, RSS is a we were taught. And today, RSS is a massive organization. It is now nearing massive organization. It is now nearing massive organization. It is now nearing its 100th anniversary. its 100th anniversary. its 100th anniversary. Such a massive volunteer Such a massive volunteer Such a massive volunteer organization likely organization likely organization likely doesn't exist anywhere else in the doesn't exist anywhere else in the doesn't exist anywhere else in the world. Millions of people are connected world. Millions of people are connected world. Millions of people are connected to to to it. But understanding it. But understanding it. But understanding RSS is not that RSS is not that RSS is not that simple. One must make an effort to truly simple. One must make an effort to truly simple. One must make an effort to truly grasp the nature of its grasp the nature of its grasp the nature of its work. More than anything, the RSS provides you with a anything, the RSS provides you with a anything, the RSS provides you with a clear direction toward what can truly be clear direction toward what can truly be clear direction toward what can truly be called a purpose in called a purpose in called a purpose in life. Secondly, the nation is life. Secondly, the nation is life. Secondly, the nation is everything and serving the people is everything and serving the people is everything and serving the people is akin to serving God. This is what has akin to serving God. This is what has akin to serving God. This is what has been said since the Vic era. What our been said since the Vic era. What our been said since the Vic era. What our sages have said, what Vivean said and sages have said, what Vivean said and sages have said, what Vivean said and what the RSS what the RSS what the RSS echoes. A volunteer is told that the echoes. A volunteer is told that the echoes. A volunteer is told that the inspiration he gains from inspiration he gains from inspiration he gains from RSS, it's not just about attending the RSS, it's not just about attending the RSS, it's not just about attending the one-hour session or wearing the uniform. one-hour session or wearing the uniform. one-hour session or wearing the uniform. What matters is what you do for society. What matters is what you do for society. What matters is what you do for society. And today, inspired by that spirit, many And today, inspired by that spirit, many And today, inspired by that spirit, many initiatives are thriving. Like some initiatives are thriving. Like some initiatives are thriving. Like some volunteers established an organization volunteers established an organization volunteers established an organization called called called Savaharti. This organization serves the Savaharti. This organization serves the Savaharti. This organization serves the slums and settlements where the poorest slums and settlements where the poorest slums and settlements where the poorest people live, which they call service people live, which they call service people live, which they call service communities. communities. communities. To my To my To my knowledge, they run knowledge, they run knowledge, they run approximately 125,000 service projects approximately 125,000 service projects approximately 125,000 service projects without any government without any government without any government assistance solely through community assistance solely through community assistance solely through community support. They spend time support. They spend time support. They spend time there, teach the children, care for there, teach the children, care for there, teach the children, care for their health, instill good their health, instill good their health, instill good values, and work towards improving values, and work towards improving values, and work towards improving cleanliness in these communities. cleanliness in these communities. cleanliness in these communities. Running 125,000 social service projects Running 125,000 social service projects Running 125,000 social service projects is no small feat. is no small feat. is no small feat. Similarly, some volunteers nurtured by Similarly, some volunteers nurtured by Similarly, some volunteers nurtured by RSS are dedicated to serving tribal RSS are dedicated to serving tribal RSS are dedicated to serving tribal communities through Vanvasi Kalyan communities through Vanvasi Kalyan communities through Vanvasi Kalyan Asham. They live among the tribal Asham. They live among the tribal Asham. They live among the tribal people working for their welfare. They people working for their welfare. They people working for their welfare. They have established over 70,000 one teacher have established over 70,000 one teacher have established over 70,000 one teacher schools in remote tribal regions. There schools in remote tribal regions. There schools in remote tribal regions. There are also some people in America who show are also some people in America who show are also some people in America who show their support for this cause. their support for this cause. their support for this cause. and contribute donations of about $10 or and contribute donations of about $10 or and contribute donations of about $10 or $15. And they say skip a Coca-Cola this $15. And they say skip a Coca-Cola this $15. And they say skip a Coca-Cola this month. Don't drink Coca-Cola and donate month. Don't drink Coca-Cola and donate month. Don't drink Coca-Cola and donate that money to an one teacher school that money to an one teacher school that money to an one teacher school instead. Now imagine 70,000 one teacher instead. Now imagine 70,000 one teacher instead. Now imagine 70,000 one teacher schools dedicated to educating tribal schools dedicated to educating tribal schools dedicated to educating tribal children. Some volunteers have founded children. Some volunteers have founded children. Some volunteers have founded Bidyabharati to revolutionize education. Bidyabharati to revolutionize education. Bidyabharati to revolutionize education. Today they run nearly 25,000 Today they run nearly 25,000 Today they run nearly 25,000 schools educating around 3 million schools educating around 3 million schools educating around 3 million students and I believe that millions of students and I believe that millions of students and I believe that millions of students have benefited from this students have benefited from this students have benefited from this initiative receiving quality education initiative receiving quality education initiative receiving quality education at an incredibly low at an incredibly low at an incredibly low cost. Alongside education values are cost. Alongside education values are cost. Alongside education values are prioritized and students remain grounded prioritized and students remain grounded prioritized and students remain grounded learning skills so they don't become a learning skills so they don't become a learning skills so they don't become a burden on society. That is in every burden on society. That is in every burden on society. That is in every aspect of life whether it's women, youth aspect of life whether it's women, youth aspect of life whether it's women, youth or even laborers the RSS has played a or even laborers the RSS has played a or even laborers the RSS has played a role in terms of membership size if I role in terms of membership size if I role in terms of membership size if I may say so. We have the Indian labor may say so. We have the Indian labor may say so. We have the Indian labor union it has union it has union it has around around around 50,000 50,000 50,000 unions with millions of members across unions with millions of members across unions with millions of members across the country. Perhaps in terms of scale the country. Perhaps in terms of scale the country. Perhaps in terms of scale there is no bigger labor union in the there is no bigger labor union in the there is no bigger labor union in the world. But what's interesting is the world. But what's interesting is the world. But what's interesting is the approach they take. take. take. Historically, leftist ideologies have Historically, leftist ideologies have Historically, leftist ideologies have fueled labor movements fueled labor movements fueled labor movements worldwide. And what has been their worldwide. And what has been their worldwide. And what has been their slogan? Workers of the world, unite. The slogan? Workers of the world, unite. The slogan? Workers of the world, unite. The message was clear. Unite first and then message was clear. Unite first and then message was clear. Unite first and then we'll deal with everything else. But we'll deal with everything else. But we'll deal with everything else. But what do the labor unions run by RSS what do the labor unions run by RSS what do the labor unions run by RSS trained volunteers believe in? trained volunteers believe in? trained volunteers believe in? They say workers unite the world. Others world. Others world. Others say workers of the world unite. And we say workers of the world unite. And we say workers of the world unite. And we say workers unite the say workers unite the say workers unite the world. It may seem like just a small world. It may seem like just a small world. It may seem like just a small shift in words, but it represents a huge shift in words, but it represents a huge shift in words, but it represents a huge ideological transformation. The ideological transformation. The ideological transformation. The volunteers who come from the volunteers who come from the volunteers who come from the RSS follow their own interests, nature, RSS follow their own interests, nature, RSS follow their own interests, nature, and inclination. and inclination. and inclination. And in doing so, they strengthen and And in doing so, they strengthen and And in doing so, they strengthen and promote these kinds of activities. When promote these kinds of activities. When promote these kinds of activities. When you observe these you observe these you observe these initiatives, you'll see how over the initiatives, you'll see how over the initiatives, you'll see how over the past 100 years, the past 100 years, the past 100 years, the RSS has dedicated RSS has dedicated RSS has dedicated itself with the discipline and devotion itself with the discipline and devotion itself with the discipline and devotion of a of a of a seeker, staying away from the glare of seeker, staying away from the glare of seeker, staying away from the glare of mainstream attention. I feel blessed to mainstream attention. I feel blessed to mainstream attention. I feel blessed to gain life's values from such a sacred gain life's values from such a sacred gain life's values from such a sacred organization. Through the RSS, I found a organization. Through the RSS, I found a organization. Through the RSS, I found a life of life of life of purpose. Then I was fortunate to spend purpose. Then I was fortunate to spend purpose. Then I was fortunate to spend some time among the saints which gave me some time among the saints which gave me some time among the saints which gave me a strong spiritual foundation. I found a strong spiritual foundation. I found a strong spiritual foundation. I found discipline and a life of purpose and discipline and a life of purpose and discipline and a life of purpose and through the guidance of saints I gained through the guidance of saints I gained through the guidance of saints I gained spiritual grounding. Swami spiritual grounding. Swami spiritual grounding. Swami Atmastanandanda and others like him have Atmastanandanda and others like him have Atmastanandanda and others like him have held my hand throughout my journey held my hand throughout my journey held my hand throughout my journey constantly guiding me at every step. The constantly guiding me at every step. The constantly guiding me at every step. The teachings teachings teachings of Ramach Krishna Mishan Swami of Ramach Krishna Mishan Swami of Ramach Krishna Mishan Swami Viveanand and the servicedriven Viveanand and the servicedriven Viveanand and the servicedriven philosophy of the RSS have played a philosophy of the RSS have played a philosophy of the RSS have played a crucial role in shaping crucial role in shaping crucial role in shaping me. But they've also helped push the me. But they've also helped push the me. But they've also helped push the idea of India. What is the idea idea of India. What is the idea idea of India. What is the idea uh that unifies India? What is India as uh that unifies India? What is India as uh that unifies India? What is India as a nation? What is the foundational idea a nation? What is the foundational idea a nation? What is the foundational idea that unites all of these that unites all of these that unites all of these desperate worlds and communities and desperate worlds and communities and desperate worlds and communities and cultures? What would it cultures? What would it cultures? What would it be? be? be? Look, India is a cultural identity. It is a civilization. identity. It is a civilization. identity. It is a civilization. that dates back thousands of years. Consider the vastness of years. Consider the vastness of years. Consider the vastness of India. Over a 100 languages, thousands of dialects. languages, thousands of dialects. languages, thousands of dialects. India is so diverse that we have a India is so diverse that we have a India is so diverse that we have a saying that every 20 miles the language saying that every 20 miles the language saying that every 20 miles the language changes, customs change, cuisine changes, customs change, cuisine changes, customs change, cuisine changes, even clothing styles shift from changes, even clothing styles shift from changes, even clothing styles shift from region to region, from the south to the region to region, from the south to the region to region, from the south to the north. You will see immense diversity north. You will see immense diversity north. You will see immense diversity across the country. But if you dig a across the country. But if you dig a across the country. But if you dig a little little little deeper, you will deeper, you will deeper, you will find a common thread. For example, the find a common thread. For example, the find a common thread. For example, the stories of Lord Ram can be heard stories of Lord Ram can be heard stories of Lord Ram can be heard everywhere in India. His name echoes in everywhere in India. His name echoes in everywhere in India. His name echoes in every corner of the country. But if you every corner of the country. But if you every corner of the country. But if you look look look closely from Tamil Nadu to Jammu and closely from Tamil Nadu to Jammu and closely from Tamil Nadu to Jammu and Kashmir, you will always find people Kashmir, you will always find people Kashmir, you will always find people whose names include Ram in some form. In Gujarat, he might be called form. In Gujarat, he might be called form. In Gujarat, he might be called Ramay. in Tamil Nadu Ramay. in Tamil Nadu Ramay. in Tamil Nadu Ramachandra and in Maharashtra Ram Ramachandra and in Maharashtra Ram Ramachandra and in Maharashtra Ram Bhau. This unique cultural bond is what Bhau. This unique cultural bond is what Bhau. This unique cultural bond is what unites India as one unites India as one unites India as one civilization. Takes civilization. Takes civilization. Takes something as simple something as simple something as simple as bathing in as bathing in as bathing in water. We have a water. We have a water. We have a ritual where all the rivers of India are ritual where all the rivers of India are ritual where all the rivers of India are remembered. remembered. remembered. They chant I am bathing with the waters They chant I am bathing with the waters They chant I am bathing with the waters of all these rivers Ganga Yamuna of all these rivers Ganga Yamuna of all these rivers Ganga Yamuna Godavari Godavari Godavari Saraswati Narmmad Synindhu Caviri it's a Saraswati Narmmad Synindhu Caviri it's a Saraswati Narmmad Synindhu Caviri it's a sentiment that unites a nation and we sentiment that unites a nation and we sentiment that unites a nation and we have a long tradition of making such have a long tradition of making such have a long tradition of making such resolutions at the beginning of resolutions at the beginning of resolutions at the beginning of important events and important events and important events and rituals and the resolution itself can rituals and the resolution itself can rituals and the resolution itself can present a historical present a historical present a historical record and in so doing serve as a way of record and in so doing serve as a way of record and in so doing serve as a way of collecting and preserving historical collecting and preserving historical collecting and preserving historical data. It has been an incredibly unique data. It has been an incredibly unique data. It has been an incredibly unique system guided meticulously by our system guided meticulously by our system guided meticulously by our scriptures. When someone makes a scriptures. When someone makes a scriptures. When someone makes a resolution, performs a puja or even resolution, performs a puja or even resolution, performs a puja or even during weddings, we start by invoking during weddings, we start by invoking during weddings, we start by invoking the entire universe beginning with jambu the entire universe beginning with jambu the entire universe beginning with jambu bat bat bat kandry and gradually narrow it down to kandry and gradually narrow it down to kandry and gradually narrow it down to the village then mentioning the specific the village then mentioning the specific the village then mentioning the specific family and finally we invoke the family family and finally we invoke the family family and finally we invoke the family deity. This practice is still alive deity. This practice is still alive deity. This practice is still alive happening daily in every corner of happening daily in every corner of happening daily in every corner of India. India. India. But sadly the western and global models But sadly the western and global models But sadly the western and global models began viewing began viewing began viewing nations only as administrative systems. nations only as administrative systems. nations only as administrative systems. India however has had a variety of India however has had a variety of India however has had a variety of administrative systems throughout administrative systems throughout administrative systems throughout history. Many systems were fragmented, history. Many systems were fragmented, history. Many systems were fragmented, scattered and varied across regions. scattered and varied across regions. scattered and varied across regions. Kings and rulers were numerous. But Kings and rulers were numerous. But Kings and rulers were numerous. But India's unity India's unity India's unity lay in cultural bonds. Pilgrimage lay in cultural bonds. Pilgrimage lay in cultural bonds. Pilgrimage traditions played a key role in traditions played a key role in traditions played a key role in preserving this unity. Shankarachara preserving this unity. Shankarachara preserving this unity. Shankarachara established the four pilgrimage sites. established the four pilgrimage sites. established the four pilgrimage sites. Even today millions of people travel Even today millions of people travel Even today millions of people travel from one place to another for from one place to another for from one place to another for pilgrimage. In Kashi you'll find people pilgrimage. In Kashi you'll find people pilgrimage. In Kashi you'll find people who bring water from Ramsheshwaram to who bring water from Ramsheshwaram to who bring water from Ramsheshwaram to Kashi and take water from Kashi to Kashi and take water from Kashi to Kashi and take water from Kashi to Ramshwaram. Even if Ramshwaram. Even if Ramshwaram. Even if you look at our Hindu calendar, you'll you look at our Hindu calendar, you'll you look at our Hindu calendar, you'll find so many things across the country find so many things across the country find so many things across the country that you can't even that you can't even that you can't even imagine. If we look at the historical imagine. If we look at the historical imagine. If we look at the historical foundation of modern foundation of modern foundation of modern India along with yourself, Mahatma India along with yourself, Mahatma India along with yourself, Mahatma Gandhi is one of the most important Gandhi is one of the most important Gandhi is one of the most important humans to humans to humans to have ever lived but certainly one of the have ever lived but certainly one of the have ever lived but certainly one of the most important humans to the history of most important humans to the history of most important humans to the history of India. India. India. What do you admire about Mahatma Gandhi? As I had mentioned Gandhi? As I had mentioned Gandhi? As I had mentioned before, I was born in before, I was born in before, I was born in Gujarat and Gujarati is my mother Gujarat and Gujarati is my mother Gujarat and Gujarati is my mother tongue. Mahatma Gandhi was also born in tongue. Mahatma Gandhi was also born in tongue. Mahatma Gandhi was also born in Gujarat. His native language was Gujarat. His native language was Gujarat. His native language was Gujarati Gujarati Gujarati too. He pursued a career as an too. He pursued a career as an too. He pursued a career as an attorney and lived overseas for several attorney and lived overseas for several attorney and lived overseas for several years. He had plenty of great years. He had plenty of great years. He had plenty of great opportunities. But the deep sense of duty within But the deep sense of duty within But the deep sense of duty within him along with the values instilled by him along with the values instilled by him along with the values instilled by his family led him to give up all his family led him to give up all his family led him to give up all comforts and devote his life to serving comforts and devote his life to serving comforts and devote his life to serving the people of India. He joined the the people of India. He joined the the people of India. He joined the struggle for India's independence. And to this day he continues to deeply day he continues to deeply day he continues to deeply influence the life of every Indian in influence the life of every Indian in influence the life of every Indian in some way. some way. some way. Mahatma Gandhi tried Mahatma Gandhi tried Mahatma Gandhi tried to live by his principles and practiced to live by his principles and practiced to live by his principles and practiced what he preached. For what he preached. For what he preached. For example, he strongly advocated for example, he strongly advocated for example, he strongly advocated for cleanliness and practiced it cleanliness and practiced it cleanliness and practiced it himself. And he made it a point to himself. And he made it a point to himself. And he made it a point to discuss cleanliness wherever he went. discuss cleanliness wherever he went. discuss cleanliness wherever he went. Another key factor to consider is Another key factor to consider is Another key factor to consider is India's fight for independence. independence. independence. India was ruled by the India was ruled by the India was ruled by the muggles. the British and several other muggles. the British and several other muggles. the British and several other foreign powers. Despite being bound by the powers. Despite being bound by the powers. Despite being bound by the shackles of colonial rule for centuries, the flame of independence centuries, the flame of independence centuries, the flame of independence burned burned burned brightly. In every corner and nook of brightly. In every corner and nook of brightly. In every corner and nook of India, never fading, always fueling the India, never fading, always fueling the India, never fading, always fueling the desire for freedom. desire for freedom. desire for freedom. Millions of people sacrificed their Millions of people sacrificed their Millions of people sacrificed their lives so the light of freedom could lives so the light of freedom could lives so the light of freedom could shine on India. They laid down their shine on India. They laid down their shine on India. They laid down their lives for freedom. Sacrificing their lives for freedom. Sacrificing their lives for freedom. Sacrificing their youth behind prison youth behind prison youth behind prison walls. Mahatma Gandhi also fought for walls. Mahatma Gandhi also fought for walls. Mahatma Gandhi also fought for India's independence but in his own way. India's independence but in his own way. India's independence but in his own way. Indeed the other freedom fighters were Indeed the other freedom fighters were Indeed the other freedom fighters were brave warriors and devoted sons of brave warriors and devoted sons of brave warriors and devoted sons of mother India. They came, they fought and mother India. They came, they fought and mother India. They came, they fought and their martyrdom immortalized them and their martyrdom immortalized them and their martyrdom immortalized them and they did indeed have a lasting impact. they did indeed have a lasting impact. they did indeed have a lasting impact. But it was Mahatma Gandhi who awakened a But it was Mahatma Gandhi who awakened a But it was Mahatma Gandhi who awakened a nation leading a mass movement fueled by nation leading a mass movement fueled by nation leading a mass movement fueled by truth. And he wo even a sweeper into the truth. And he wo even a sweeper into the truth. And he wo even a sweeper into the very fabric of the freedom struggle. He very fabric of the freedom struggle. He very fabric of the freedom struggle. He told teachers their work was part of the told teachers their work was part of the told teachers their work was part of the freedom struggle. He told the people freedom struggle. He told the people freedom struggle. He told the people spinning thread and weaving clothes they spinning thread and weaving clothes they spinning thread and weaving clothes they were freedom fighters. were freedom fighters. were freedom fighters. He told those tending to lepers that He told those tending to lepers that He told those tending to lepers that their service was a step toward India's their service was a step toward India's their service was a step toward India's freedom. He viewed every task as a vital freedom. He viewed every task as a vital freedom. He viewed every task as a vital thread in the fabric of India's thread in the fabric of India's thread in the fabric of India's independence movement. And this independence movement. And this independence movement. And this transformed India's common man into a transformed India's common man into a transformed India's common man into a soldier in the quest for soldier in the quest for soldier in the quest for freedom. Gandhi forged a mass movement freedom. Gandhi forged a mass movement freedom. Gandhi forged a mass movement so immense that the British could never so immense that the British could never so immense that the British could never fully grasp it. fully grasp it. fully grasp it. The British never imagined that a pinch The British never imagined that a pinch The British never imagined that a pinch of salt from the Dandy March could spark of salt from the Dandy March could spark of salt from the Dandy March could spark a massive revolution and he made it a massive revolution and he made it a massive revolution and he made it happen. And his life, presence, style, happen. And his life, presence, style, happen. And his life, presence, style, mannerisms all left a profound mannerisms all left a profound mannerisms all left a profound impact and I have seen many of his stories evolve into seen many of his stories evolve into seen many of his stories evolve into timeless legends. I recall an incident timeless legends. I recall an incident timeless legends. I recall an incident from a roundt from a roundt from a roundt conference. Yeah. I believe he was conference. Yeah. I believe he was conference. Yeah. I believe he was attending attending attending a roundt a roundt a roundt conference. He was supposed to meet King conference. He was supposed to meet King conference. He was supposed to meet King George at the Buckingham George at the Buckingham George at the Buckingham Palace draped in his breachcloth. Palace draped in his breachcloth. Palace draped in his breachcloth. Mahatma Gandhi made his way to the Mahatma Gandhi made his way to the Mahatma Gandhi made his way to the palace. Many people were amazed that he palace. Many people were amazed that he palace. Many people were amazed that he had showed up in that attire to meet the had showed up in that attire to meet the had showed up in that attire to meet the king. Gandhi remarked he didn't need to wear a Gandhi remarked he didn't need to wear a Gandhi remarked he didn't need to wear a lot of clothes. He said your king is lot of clothes. He said your king is lot of clothes. He said your king is wearing enough clothes for the both of wearing enough clothes for the both of wearing enough clothes for the both of us. This was the whimsical charm of his us. This was the whimsical charm of his us. This was the whimsical charm of his nature. Mahatma Gandhi possessed many nature. Mahatma Gandhi possessed many nature. Mahatma Gandhi possessed many remarkable qualities. His call for remarkable qualities. His call for remarkable qualities. His call for unity and recognition unity and recognition unity and recognition of the people's of the people's of the people's strength still resonates with me. In strength still resonates with me. In strength still resonates with me. In everything I everything I everything I do, I strive to include the common do, I strive to include the common do, I strive to include the common man and to ensure the participation of man and to ensure the participation of man and to ensure the participation of as many as as many as as many as possible. I don't believe in leaving possible. I don't believe in leaving possible. I don't believe in leaving everything to the government. everything to the government. everything to the government. I am a firm believer in the power of I am a firm believer in the power of I am a firm believer in the power of social social social change. So change. So change. So he was probably one of the greatest he was probably one of the greatest he was probably one of the greatest leaders of the 20th leaders of the 20th leaders of the 20th century. You are one of the greatest century. You are one of the greatest century. You are one of the greatest leaders of the 21st century. Those two centuries are very century. Those two centuries are very century. Those two centuries are very different. and you have been been been masterful in uh the game in the art of masterful in uh the game in the art of masterful in uh the game in the art of geopolitics. So let me ask you, you have geopolitics. So let me ask you, you have geopolitics. So let me ask you, you have found a balance. So when when found a balance. So when when found a balance. So when when negotiating on the world stage with negotiating on the world stage with negotiating on the world stage with super powerful super powerful super powerful nations, is it better to be loved or nations, is it better to be loved or nations, is it better to be loved or feared? It seems like you are a feared? It seems like you are a feared? It seems like you are a masterclass of being loved by everybody, masterclass of being loved by everybody, masterclass of being loved by everybody, but everybody knows and feels the but everybody knows and feels the but everybody knows and feels the strength. So finding that balance, can strength. So finding that balance, can strength. So finding that balance, can you speak to that you speak to that you speak to that balance? First and balance? First and balance? First and foremost, I don't think this is a fair foremost, I don't think this is a fair foremost, I don't think this is a fair comparison. comparison. comparison. Mahatma Gandhi Mahatma Gandhi Mahatma Gandhi wasn't just wasn't just wasn't just a 20th century a 20th century a 20th century leader. His relevance transcends leader. His relevance transcends leader. His relevance transcends centuries. Mahatma Gandhi's centuries. Mahatma Gandhi's centuries. Mahatma Gandhi's legacy will last for centuries to come legacy will last for centuries to come legacy will last for centuries to come and he remains relevant to date. As far and he remains relevant to date. As far and he remains relevant to date. As far as I am concerned, I have a as I am concerned, I have a as I am concerned, I have a responsibility to responsibility to responsibility to fulfill. Yet the weight of that fulfill. Yet the weight of that fulfill. Yet the weight of that responsibility pales in comparison to my responsibility pales in comparison to my responsibility pales in comparison to my country. I am nowhere near as great as country. I am nowhere near as great as country. I am nowhere near as great as my my my country. And my strength lies not in my country. And my strength lies not in my country. And my strength lies not in my name but in the backing of 1.4 billion name but in the backing of 1.4 billion name but in the backing of 1.4 billion Indians and thousands of years of Indians and thousands of years of Indians and thousands of years of timeless culture and timeless culture and timeless culture and heritage. So wherever I go, I carry with heritage. So wherever I go, I carry with heritage. So wherever I go, I carry with me the essence of thousands of years of me the essence of thousands of years of me the essence of thousands of years of Vic tradition. Vic tradition. Vic tradition. The timeless teachings of Swami The timeless teachings of Swami The timeless teachings of Swami Viveanand and the Viveanand and the Viveanand and the blessings, dreams and aspirations of 1.4 blessings, dreams and aspirations of 1.4 blessings, dreams and aspirations of 1.4 billion billion billion Indians. When I shake hands with a world Indians. When I shake hands with a world Indians. When I shake hands with a world leader, it's not leader, it's not leader, it's not Modi but 1.4 billion Indians doing so. Modi but 1.4 billion Indians doing so. Modi but 1.4 billion Indians doing so. So this isn't my strength at all. It is So this isn't my strength at all. It is So this isn't my strength at all. It is rather the strength of India. rather the strength of India. rather the strength of India. You see, I recall something that You see, I recall something that You see, I recall something that happened all the way back in happened all the way back in happened all the way back in 2013. It was when my party declared I 2013. It was when my party declared I 2013. It was when my party declared I would be their prime ministerial would be their prime ministerial would be their prime ministerial candidate. My critics often tried to candidate. My critics often tried to candidate. My critics often tried to corner me on one corner me on one corner me on one point. It became a topic of widespread point. It became a topic of widespread point. It became a topic of widespread discussion. Modi is nothing more than a discussion. Modi is nothing more than a discussion. Modi is nothing more than a state state state leader. What does he know of foreign leader. What does he know of foreign leader. What does he know of foreign policy? Does he even understand global policy? Does he even understand global policy? Does he even understand global geopolitics? This was on everyone's lips geopolitics? This was on everyone's lips geopolitics? This was on everyone's lips and I was asked this question in every and I was asked this question in every and I was asked this question in every interview. I gave a very well thoughtout interview. I gave a very well thoughtout interview. I gave a very well thoughtout answer at the time. I said I won't lay answer at the time. I said I won't lay answer at the time. I said I won't lay out my entire foreign policy in an out my entire foreign policy in an out my entire foreign policy in an interview nor is it needed. interview nor is it needed. interview nor is it needed. That That That said, India said, India said, India will neither allow itself to be looked will neither allow itself to be looked will neither allow itself to be looked down down down upon nor will it ever look up to upon nor will it ever look up to upon nor will it ever look up to anyone. India will now see eye to eye anyone. India will now see eye to eye anyone. India will now see eye to eye with her with her with her counterparts. This was my belief in counterparts. This was my belief in counterparts. This was my belief in 2013 and it still lies at the heart of 2013 and it still lies at the heart of 2013 and it still lies at the heart of my foreign policy. For me, the country my foreign policy. For me, the country my foreign policy. For me, the country always comes first. always comes first. always comes first. However, to belittle someone or speaking However, to belittle someone or speaking However, to belittle someone or speaking ill of ill of ill of others is neither part of my cultural others is neither part of my cultural others is neither part of my cultural values nor my values nor my values nor my traditions. Moreover, our culture traditions. Moreover, our culture traditions. Moreover, our culture upholds and advocates for the welfare of upholds and advocates for the welfare of upholds and advocates for the welfare of mankind. India has always championed the mankind. India has always championed the mankind. India has always championed the ideas of global peace and brotherhood. ideas of global peace and brotherhood. ideas of global peace and brotherhood. For centuries, we have envisioned the For centuries, we have envisioned the For centuries, we have envisioned the world as one big family. Our noble world as one big family. Our noble world as one big family. Our noble ancestors envisaged the welfare of the ancestors envisaged the welfare of the ancestors envisaged the welfare of the whole world and whole world and whole world and universe. And that's why you must have universe. And that's why you must have universe. And that's why you must have noticed the nature of our conversations noticed the nature of our conversations noticed the nature of our conversations as well as the ideas that I have as well as the ideas that I have as well as the ideas that I have presented on the global stage which are presented on the global stage which are presented on the global stage which are rooted in respect and rooted in respect and rooted in respect and positivity. For example, I spoke about positivity. For example, I spoke about positivity. For example, I spoke about the environment in one of my speeches. I the environment in one of my speeches. I the environment in one of my speeches. I proposed the concept of one sun, one proposed the concept of one sun, one proposed the concept of one sun, one world, one world, one world, one grid. During the COVID pandemic, I grid. During the COVID pandemic, I grid. During the COVID pandemic, I delivered a speech at the G20 delivered a speech at the G20 delivered a speech at the G20 summit. I put forth the vision of one health where humans and vision of one health where humans and vision of one health where humans and nature would live in harmony. And I have nature would live in harmony. And I have nature would live in harmony. And I have always worked towards this. always worked towards this. always worked towards this. We hosted the G20 summit with the motto, We hosted the G20 summit with the motto, We hosted the G20 summit with the motto, one earth, one family, one one earth, one family, one one earth, one family, one future. We have inherited this timeless future. We have inherited this timeless future. We have inherited this timeless wisdom and it's our duty to share it wisdom and it's our duty to share it wisdom and it's our duty to share it with the world. To give you an example, with the world. To give you an example, with the world. To give you an example, I have advocated for embracing renewable I have advocated for embracing renewable I have advocated for embracing renewable energy. We founded the International energy. We founded the International energy. We founded the International Solar Alliance with the motto one sun, Solar Alliance with the motto one sun, Solar Alliance with the motto one sun, one world, one grid. Even when it comes one world, one grid. Even when it comes one world, one grid. Even when it comes to global healthcare, I had proposed one to global healthcare, I had proposed one to global healthcare, I had proposed one earth, one health. earth, one health. earth, one health. This This This initiative extends not only initiative extends not only initiative extends not only to humans but also to all flora and to humans but also to all flora and to humans but also to all flora and fauna. I have always aimed fauna. I have always aimed fauna. I have always aimed to initiate efforts that foster global to initiate efforts that foster global to initiate efforts that foster global well-being and the global community well-being and the global community well-being and the global community needs to join hands to accomplish that. needs to join hands to accomplish that. needs to join hands to accomplish that. We must also understand that the world We must also understand that the world We must also understand that the world has become one small village has become one small village has become one small village today. No country can thrive in today. No country can thrive in today. No country can thrive in isolation. Today we all depend upon one isolation. Today we all depend upon one isolation. Today we all depend upon one another. No one can make it far by another. No one can make it far by another. No one can make it far by themselves. That is why you must learn themselves. That is why you must learn themselves. That is why you must learn to synchronize with everyone. And to synchronize with everyone. And to synchronize with everyone. And everyone else must learn to synchronize everyone else must learn to synchronize everyone else must learn to synchronize with you. That's the only way to propel with you. That's the only way to propel with you. That's the only way to propel this initiative forward. Organizations this initiative forward. Organizations this initiative forward. Organizations like the United Nations came into being like the United Nations came into being like the United Nations came into being after the first world war. after the first world war. after the first world war. But they failed to evolve with the But they failed to evolve with the But they failed to evolve with the times. And this times. And this times. And this inability to adapt has sparked a global inability to adapt has sparked a global inability to adapt has sparked a global debate on their debate on their debate on their relevance. You have spoken about, you relevance. You have spoken about, you relevance. You have spoken about, you have the experience, you have the skill, have the experience, you have the skill, have the experience, you have the skill, you have the geopolitical leverage to be you have the geopolitical leverage to be you have the geopolitical leverage to be the biggest peacemaker in the world the biggest peacemaker in the world the biggest peacemaker in the world today on the world stage and there's today on the world stage and there's today on the world stage and there's several wars going on. several wars going on. several wars going on. Can you maybe explain how you approach Can you maybe explain how you approach Can you maybe explain how you approach the process of making the process of making the process of making peace, helping make peace between two peace, helping make peace between two peace, helping make peace between two waring nations, for example, Russia and waring nations, for example, Russia and waring nations, for example, Russia and Ukraine? Well, I represent the country Ukraine? Well, I represent the country Ukraine? Well, I represent the country that is the that is the that is the land of Lord Buddha. land of Lord Buddha. land of Lord Buddha. I represent the country that I represent the country that I represent the country that is the land of Mahatma Gandhi. These are is the land of Mahatma Gandhi. These are is the land of Mahatma Gandhi. These are the great souls whose the great souls whose the great souls whose teachings, words, actions and behavior teachings, words, actions and behavior teachings, words, actions and behavior are entirely dedicated to are entirely dedicated to are entirely dedicated to peace. And that is peace. And that is peace. And that is why culturally and why culturally and why culturally and historically our background is so historically our background is so historically our background is so strong that whenever we speak of peace strong that whenever we speak of peace strong that whenever we speak of peace the world listens to the world listens to the world listens to us because India is the land of Gautam us because India is the land of Gautam us because India is the land of Gautam Buddha and Mahatma Gandhi and Buddha and Mahatma Gandhi and Buddha and Mahatma Gandhi and Indians aren't hardwired to espouse Indians aren't hardwired to espouse Indians aren't hardwired to espouse strife and conflict. strife and conflict. strife and conflict. We espouse harmony We espouse harmony We espouse harmony instead. We seek neither to wage war instead. We seek neither to wage war instead. We seek neither to wage war against nature nor to foster strife against nature nor to foster strife against nature nor to foster strife among nations. We stand for peace and among nations. We stand for peace and among nations. We stand for peace and wherever we can act as peacemakers, we wherever we can act as peacemakers, we wherever we can act as peacemakers, we have gladly embraced that have gladly embraced that have gladly embraced that responsibility. Returning to your responsibility. Returning to your responsibility. Returning to your example, I have a close relationship example, I have a close relationship example, I have a close relationship with Russia and Ukraine alike. I can sit with President Putin and say I can sit with President Putin and say I can sit with President Putin and say that this is not the time for that this is not the time for that this is not the time for war. And I can also tell President war. And I can also tell President war. And I can also tell President Zalinski in a friendly Zalinski in a friendly Zalinski in a friendly way that brother regardless of how many way that brother regardless of how many way that brother regardless of how many people stand with you in the world. There will never be a resolution world. There will never be a resolution world. There will never be a resolution on the battlefield. on the battlefield. on the battlefield. The resolution will only The resolution will only The resolution will only come when both Ukraine and come when both Ukraine and come when both Ukraine and Russia come to the negotiating table. Russia come to the negotiating table. Russia come to the negotiating table. Ukraine may hold countless discussions Ukraine may hold countless discussions Ukraine may hold countless discussions with their allies, but it will bear no with their allies, but it will bear no with their allies, but it will bear no fruit. Discussions must include both fruit. Discussions must include both fruit. Discussions must include both parties instead. parties instead. parties instead. Initially it was challenging to find Initially it was challenging to find Initially it was challenging to find peace but peace but peace but now the current situation presents an now the current situation presents an now the current situation presents an opportunity for meaningful and opportunity for meaningful and opportunity for meaningful and productive talks between Ukraine and productive talks between Ukraine and productive talks between Ukraine and Russia. There has been a lot of Russia. There has been a lot of Russia. There has been a lot of suffering. Even the global south has suffering. Even the global south has suffering. Even the global south has suffered. The world has been grappling suffered. The world has been grappling suffered. The world has been grappling with a food, fuel and fertilizer crisis. with a food, fuel and fertilizer crisis. with a food, fuel and fertilizer crisis. So the global community should unite in So the global community should unite in So the global community should unite in the pursuit of peace. the pursuit of peace. the pursuit of peace. As for me, I have always maintained that As for me, I have always maintained that As for me, I have always maintained that I stand with peace. I am not neutral. I I stand with peace. I am not neutral. I I stand with peace. I am not neutral. I have a stance and that is peace and have a stance and that is peace and have a stance and that is peace and peace is what I strive peace is what I strive peace is what I strive for. Another difficult historic for. Another difficult historic for. Another difficult historic uh relationship and conflict is between uh relationship and conflict is between uh relationship and conflict is between India and India and India and Pakistan. So it's one of the most tense Pakistan. So it's one of the most tense Pakistan. So it's one of the most tense conflicts in the world. Two nuclear conflicts in the world. Two nuclear conflicts in the world. Two nuclear powers with strong ideological powers with strong ideological powers with strong ideological differences. differences. differences. You are a great You are a great You are a great peacemaker looking out into the future peacemaker looking out into the future peacemaker looking out into the future as a visionary. What do you see as the as a visionary. What do you see as the as a visionary. What do you see as the path for friendship, for peace, for good path for friendship, for peace, for good path for friendship, for peace, for good relations between India and Pakistan? I would like Pakistan? I would like Pakistan? I would like to delve into periods of our history the to delve into periods of our history the to delve into periods of our history the world may be unfamiliar world may be unfamiliar world may be unfamiliar with. Before 1947, during the struggle with. Before 1947, during the struggle with. Before 1947, during the struggle for for for independence, everyone was fighting side independence, everyone was fighting side independence, everyone was fighting side by side, shouldertosh shoulder, and the nation was eagerly shoulder, and the nation was eagerly shoulder, and the nation was eagerly waiting to celebrate the freedom, the waiting to celebrate the freedom, the waiting to celebrate the freedom, the joy of independence. Now we could have a lengthy discussion Now we could have a lengthy discussion Now we could have a lengthy discussion on what led to the events that unfolded but the fact remains that the unfolded but the fact remains that the unfolded but the fact remains that the policy makers of the time agreed to policy makers of the time agreed to policy makers of the time agreed to India's India's India's partition and they agreed to the Muslim partition and they agreed to the Muslim partition and they agreed to the Muslim side's demand of carving out a separate side's demand of carving out a separate side's demand of carving out a separate nation with hearts weighed down by grief nation with hearts weighed down by grief nation with hearts weighed down by grief and silent tears Indians tears Indians tears Indians embraced this painful embraced this painful embraced this painful reality. However, what reality. However, what reality. However, what unfolded was an immediate heartbreaking unfolded was an immediate heartbreaking unfolded was an immediate heartbreaking saga of saga of saga of bloodshed. Trains filled with blooded, bloodshed. Trains filled with blooded, bloodshed. Trains filled with blooded, wounded people and corpses started wounded people and corpses started wounded people and corpses started arriving from arriving from arriving from Pakistan. It was a harrowing sight. After getting their own way, we sight. After getting their own way, we sight. After getting their own way, we expected them to live and let live. And expected them to live and let live. And expected them to live and let live. And yet they chose not to foster a yet they chose not to foster a yet they chose not to foster a harmonious coexistence. Time and again harmonious coexistence. Time and again harmonious coexistence. Time and again they decided to be at odds with India. they decided to be at odds with India. they decided to be at odds with India. They have waged a proxy war against us. They have waged a proxy war against us. They have waged a proxy war against us. Don't mistake this for Don't mistake this for Don't mistake this for ideology. What kind of ideology thrives ideology. What kind of ideology thrives ideology. What kind of ideology thrives on bloodshed and the export of terror? on bloodshed and the export of terror? on bloodshed and the export of terror? And we are not the sole victims of this And we are not the sole victims of this And we are not the sole victims of this menace. Wherever terror strikes in the menace. Wherever terror strikes in the menace. Wherever terror strikes in the world, the trail somehow leads world, the trail somehow leads world, the trail somehow leads [Music] [Music] [Music] to to to Pakistan. Let's take the September 11th Pakistan. Let's take the September 11th Pakistan. Let's take the September 11th attacks for attacks for attacks for example. The main mastermind behind it, example. The main mastermind behind it, example. The main mastermind behind it, Osama bin Laden. Where did he eventually Osama bin Laden. Where did he eventually Osama bin Laden. Where did he eventually emerge from? He had taken refuge in emerge from? He had taken refuge in emerge from? He had taken refuge in Pakistan. The world has recognized Pakistan. The world has recognized Pakistan. The world has recognized that in a way terrorism and the that in a way terrorism and the that in a way terrorism and the terrorist mindset are deeply rooted in terrorist mindset are deeply rooted in terrorist mindset are deeply rooted in Pakistan. Pakistan. Pakistan. Today it stands as an epicenter of Today it stands as an epicenter of Today it stands as an epicenter of turmoil not just for India but for the turmoil not just for India but for the turmoil not just for India but for the world and we have repeatedly asked them world and we have repeatedly asked them world and we have repeatedly asked them what good can come from this path. We what good can come from this path. We what good can come from this path. We have urged them to abandon the path of have urged them to abandon the path of have urged them to abandon the path of state sponsored state sponsored state sponsored terrorism for good. What do you hope to terrorism for good. What do you hope to terrorism for good. What do you hope to gain by surrendering your nation to gain by surrendering your nation to gain by surrendering your nation to lawless forces? I even personally lawless forces? I even personally lawless forces? I even personally traveled to Lahore in the pursuit of traveled to Lahore in the pursuit of traveled to Lahore in the pursuit of peace. When I became prime peace. When I became prime peace. When I became prime minister, I specially invited Pakistan minister, I specially invited Pakistan minister, I specially invited Pakistan to my swearing in ceremony so we could to my swearing in ceremony so we could to my swearing in ceremony so we could turn over a new leaf. Yet every noble turn over a new leaf. Yet every noble turn over a new leaf. Yet every noble attempt at fostering peace was met with attempt at fostering peace was met with attempt at fostering peace was met with hostility and betrayal. hostility and betrayal. hostility and betrayal. We sincerely hope that wisdom prevails We sincerely hope that wisdom prevails We sincerely hope that wisdom prevails upon them and they choose the path of upon them and they choose the path of upon them and they choose the path of peace. I believe even the people of peace. I believe even the people of peace. I believe even the people of Pakistan long for peace because even Pakistan long for peace because even Pakistan long for peace because even they must be weary of living in strife they must be weary of living in strife they must be weary of living in strife and unrest. They must have grown weary and unrest. They must have grown weary and unrest. They must have grown weary of relentless terror where even innocent of relentless terror where even innocent of relentless terror where even innocent children are killed and countless lives children are killed and countless lives children are killed and countless lives are destroyed. are destroyed. are destroyed. Is there Is there Is there some memorable stories from your past some memorable stories from your past some memorable stories from your past attempts to try to improve relations attempts to try to improve relations attempts to try to improve relations with Pakistan that could uh guide the with Pakistan that could uh guide the with Pakistan that could uh guide the path forward into the future? Like I path forward into the future? Like I path forward into the future? Like I mentioned, my first attempt at improving mentioned, my first attempt at improving mentioned, my first attempt at improving bilateral relations bilateral relations bilateral relations was when I invited my Pakistani was when I invited my Pakistani was when I invited my Pakistani counterpart to my swearing counterpart to my swearing counterpart to my swearing in. It was a gesture of goodwill. It was in. It was a gesture of goodwill. It was in. It was a gesture of goodwill. It was a diplomatic gesture unlike any in a diplomatic gesture unlike any in a diplomatic gesture unlike any in decades. The very people who once decades. The very people who once decades. The very people who once questioned my approach to foreign questioned my approach to foreign questioned my approach to foreign policy were taken aback when they policy were taken aback when they policy were taken aback when they learned I had invited all sark heads of learned I had invited all sark heads of learned I had invited all sark heads of state and our then state and our then state and our then president Mr. Pranab president Mr. Pranab president Mr. Pranab Mukharji beautifully Mukharji beautifully Mukharji beautifully captured that historic gesture in his captured that historic gesture in his captured that historic gesture in his memoir. This was a testament to how memoir. This was a testament to how memoir. This was a testament to how clear and clear and clear and confident India's foreign policy had confident India's foreign policy had confident India's foreign policy had become. This sent a clear message to the become. This sent a clear message to the become. This sent a clear message to the world about India's commitment to peace world about India's commitment to peace world about India's commitment to peace and and and harmony. But we didn't get the desired harmony. But we didn't get the desired harmony. But we didn't get the desired outcome. outcome. outcome. Maybe to ask a little bit of a lighter Maybe to ask a little bit of a lighter Maybe to ask a little bit of a lighter question. Uh who has the better cricket question. Uh who has the better cricket question. Uh who has the better cricket team, India or team, India or team, India or Pakistan? The two teams have a uh epic Pakistan? The two teams have a uh epic Pakistan? The two teams have a uh epic rivalry on the pitch and more seriously rivalry on the pitch and more seriously rivalry on the pitch and more seriously given the geopolitical tensions that you given the geopolitical tensions that you given the geopolitical tensions that you spoke to. Uh what role do sports and spoke to. Uh what role do sports and spoke to. Uh what role do sports and cricket and football cricket and football cricket and football play in fostering better relations? play in fostering better relations? play in fostering better relations? I think sports I think sports I think sports have the have the have the power to energize the entire world. The power to energize the entire world. The power to energize the entire world. The spirit of sports brings people together spirit of sports brings people together spirit of sports brings people together across different across different across different nations. That's why I would never want nations. That's why I would never want nations. That's why I would never want to see sports being to see sports being to see sports being discredited. I truly discredited. I truly discredited. I truly believe that sports play a major role in believe that sports play a major role in believe that sports play a major role in human evolution. They're not just games. human evolution. They're not just games. human evolution. They're not just games. They connect people on a deeper They connect people on a deeper They connect people on a deeper level. Now coming to the question of level. Now coming to the question of level. Now coming to the question of who's better and who's who's better and who's who's better and who's not when it comes to techniques in not when it comes to techniques in not when it comes to techniques in sports, I'm not an expert. Only those sports, I'm not an expert. Only those sports, I'm not an expert. Only those who specialize in the technical aspects who specialize in the technical aspects who specialize in the technical aspects can judge which techniques are superior can judge which techniques are superior can judge which techniques are superior and who the best players really are. But and who the best players really are. But and who the best players really are. But sometimes the results speak for sometimes the results speak for sometimes the results speak for themselves. Just a few days ago, India themselves. Just a few days ago, India themselves. Just a few days ago, India and Pakistan played a and Pakistan played a and Pakistan played a match. The result reveals which is the match. The result reveals which is the match. The result reveals which is the better team. That's how we better team. That's how we better team. That's how we know. Yeah. I've I've watched the series know. Yeah. I've I've watched the series know. Yeah. I've I've watched the series called the greatest rivalry, India called the greatest rivalry, India called the greatest rivalry, India versus Pakistan that describes so many versus Pakistan that describes so many versus Pakistan that describes so many incredible players, so many incredible incredible players, so many incredible incredible players, so many incredible games. It's it's always beautiful to see games. It's it's always beautiful to see games. It's it's always beautiful to see a great rivalry. Uh you've also uh a great rivalry. Uh you've also uh a great rivalry. Uh you've also uh spoken about football. Football is very spoken about football. Football is very spoken about football. Football is very popular in India. So, another tough popular in India. So, another tough popular in India. So, another tough question. Who is the greatest football question. Who is the greatest football question. Who is the greatest football player of all time? We got Messi, Pelle, player of all time? We got Messi, Pelle, player of all time? We got Messi, Pelle, Maradona, Cristiano Ronaldo, Zidane. Who Maradona, Cristiano Ronaldo, Zidane. Who Maradona, Cristiano Ronaldo, Zidane. Who do you think is the do you think is the do you think is the greatest football player to have ever greatest football player to have ever greatest football player to have ever played? It's absolutely true that many played? It's absolutely true that many played? It's absolutely true that many regions in India have a strong football regions in India have a strong football regions in India have a strong football culture. Our women's football team is culture. Our women's football team is culture. Our women's football team is performing really well and the men's performing really well and the men's performing really well and the men's team is also making great progress. But team is also making great progress. But team is also making great progress. But if we talk about the past, back in the if we talk about the past, back in the if we talk about the past, back in the 1980s, one name that always stood out 1980s, one name that always stood out 1980s, one name that always stood out was was was Maradona. For that generation, he was Maradona. For that generation, he was Maradona. For that generation, he was seen as a true seen as a true seen as a true hero. And if you ask today's generation, hero. And if you ask today's generation, hero. And if you ask today's generation, they'll immediately mention Messi. Now they'll immediately mention Messi. Now they'll immediately mention Messi. Now that you've asked, another interesting that you've asked, another interesting that you've asked, another interesting memory just came to mind. memory just came to mind. memory just came to mind. There's a state in India called Madhya There's a state in India called Madhya There's a state in India called Madhya Pradesh. Right in the center, there's a Pradesh. Right in the center, there's a Pradesh. Right in the center, there's a district called Shadal, a completely district called Shadal, a completely district called Shadal, a completely tribal region where a large tribal tribal region where a large tribal tribal region where a large tribal community resides. I really enjoy community resides. I really enjoy community resides. I really enjoy interacting with people from such interacting with people from such interacting with people from such communities, especially the self-help communities, especially the self-help communities, especially the self-help groups run by tribal women. So, I groups run by tribal women. So, I groups run by tribal women. So, I decided to visit them and have a decided to visit them and have a decided to visit them and have a conversation. But when I got there, I conversation. But when I got there, I conversation. But when I got there, I noticed something fascinating. around 80 noticed something fascinating. around 80 noticed something fascinating. around 80 to 100 young boys, kids, and to 100 young boys, kids, and to 100 young boys, kids, and even some older youth, all dressed in even some older youth, all dressed in even some older youth, all dressed in sports uniforms standing together. sports uniforms standing together. sports uniforms standing together. Naturally, I walked over to them. So, I Naturally, I walked over to them. So, I Naturally, I walked over to them. So, I asked them, "Where are you all from?" asked them, "Where are you all from?" asked them, "Where are you all from?" And they replied, "We're from Mini And they replied, "We're from Mini And they replied, "We're from Mini Brazil." I was surprised and said, "What Brazil." I was surprised and said, "What Brazil." I was surprised and said, "What do you mean by mini Brazil?" They said, do you mean by mini Brazil?" They said, do you mean by mini Brazil?" They said, "That's what people call our village." "That's what people call our village." "That's what people call our village." Curious, I asked, "Why do they call it Curious, I asked, "Why do they call it Curious, I asked, "Why do they call it mini Brazil?" They mini Brazil?" They mini Brazil?" They explained in our village football has explained in our village football has explained in our village football has been played for four been played for four been played for four generations. Nearly 80 national level generations. Nearly 80 national level generations. Nearly 80 national level players have come from players have come from players have come from here. Our entire village is dedicated to here. Our entire village is dedicated to here. Our entire village is dedicated to football. They also told me when we host football. They also told me when we host football. They also told me when we host our annual football match nearly 20 to our annual football match nearly 20 to our annual football match nearly 20 to 25,000 spectators come from nearby 25,000 spectators come from nearby 25,000 spectators come from nearby villages to watch. I see the growing villages to watch. I see the growing villages to watch. I see the growing craze for football in India these days craze for football in India these days craze for football in India these days as a positive sign because it not only as a positive sign because it not only as a positive sign because it not only fuels passion but also builds true team fuels passion but also builds true team fuels passion but also builds true team spirit. Yeah, football is one of the spirit. Yeah, football is one of the spirit. Yeah, football is one of the great sports that unites not just India great sports that unites not just India great sports that unites not just India the the whole world and that that just the the whole world and that that just the the whole world and that that just shows the power of what sport can do. shows the power of what sport can do. shows the power of what sport can do. You recently visited the United You recently visited the United You recently visited the United States and uh reinvigorated your States and uh reinvigorated your States and uh reinvigorated your friendship with uh Donald Trump. What do friendship with uh Donald Trump. What do friendship with uh Donald Trump. What do you like about Donald Trump as a friend, you like about Donald Trump as a friend, you like about Donald Trump as a friend, as a leader? I'd like to share with you as a leader? I'd like to share with you as a leader? I'd like to share with you an event that stands out in my memory. an event that stands out in my memory. an event that stands out in my memory. Perhaps from that you'll Perhaps from that you'll Perhaps from that you'll get a better understanding of the point get a better understanding of the point get a better understanding of the point I'm trying to convey. For example, we I'm trying to convey. For example, we I'm trying to convey. For example, we had an event in Houston. had an event in Houston. had an event in Houston. Howdy Howdy Howdy Modi. Both President Trump and I were Modi. Both President Trump and I were Modi. Both President Trump and I were there and the entire stadium was there and the entire stadium was there and the entire stadium was completely packed. A massive crowd at an completely packed. A massive crowd at an completely packed. A massive crowd at an event in the US is a huge moment. While event in the US is a huge moment. While event in the US is a huge moment. While packed stadiums are common in sports, packed stadiums are common in sports, packed stadiums are common in sports, this was extraordinary for a political this was extraordinary for a political this was extraordinary for a political rally. The Indian diaspora had gathered rally. The Indian diaspora had gathered rally. The Indian diaspora had gathered in large in large in large numbers. Both of us delivered speeches numbers. Both of us delivered speeches numbers. Both of us delivered speeches and he sat down below listening to me and he sat down below listening to me and he sat down below listening to me speak. Now that's his humility. the speak. Now that's his humility. the speak. Now that's his humility. the president of the United States sitting president of the United States sitting president of the United States sitting in the audience while I spoke from the in the audience while I spoke from the in the audience while I spoke from the stage. That was a remarkable gesture on stage. That was a remarkable gesture on stage. That was a remarkable gesture on his part. After finishing my speech, I his part. After finishing my speech, I his part. After finishing my speech, I stepped down and as we all know, stepped down and as we all know, stepped down and as we all know, security in the US is extremely security in the US is extremely security in the US is extremely strict and uh thorough. The level of strict and uh thorough. The level of strict and uh thorough. The level of scrutiny there is on a completely scrutiny there is on a completely scrutiny there is on a completely different level. I went over to thank different level. I went over to thank different level. I went over to thank him and casually said, "If you don't him and casually said, "If you don't him and casually said, "If you don't mind, why don't we take a lap around the mind, why don't we take a lap around the mind, why don't we take a lap around the stadium? There are so many people here. stadium? There are so many people here. stadium? There are so many people here. Let's walk, wave, and greet Let's walk, wave, and greet Let's walk, wave, and greet them." In American life, it's almost them." In American life, it's almost them." In American life, it's almost impossible for the president to walk impossible for the president to walk impossible for the president to walk into a crowd of thousands. into a crowd of thousands. into a crowd of thousands. But without even a moment's hesitation, But without even a moment's hesitation, But without even a moment's hesitation, he agreed and started he agreed and started he agreed and started walking with me. His entire security walking with me. His entire security walking with me. His entire security detail was thrown off guard. But for me, detail was thrown off guard. But for me, detail was thrown off guard. But for me, that moment was truly touching. It that moment was truly touching. It that moment was truly touching. It showed me that this man had showed me that this man had showed me that this man had courage. He makes his own decisions, but courage. He makes his own decisions, but courage. He makes his own decisions, but also he trusted me and my lead in that also he trusted me and my lead in that also he trusted me and my lead in that moment enough to have walked with me moment enough to have walked with me moment enough to have walked with me into the into the into the crowd. It was that sense of mutual crowd. It was that sense of mutual crowd. It was that sense of mutual trust, a strong bond between us that I trust, a strong bond between us that I trust, a strong bond between us that I truly witnessed on that day. And the way truly witnessed on that day. And the way truly witnessed on that day. And the way I saw President Trump that day walking I saw President Trump that day walking I saw President Trump that day walking into into into a crowd of thousands without even asking a crowd of thousands without even asking a crowd of thousands without even asking security was truly amazing. And if you security was truly amazing. And if you security was truly amazing. And if you watch the video now, you'll be amazed. watch the video now, you'll be amazed. watch the video now, you'll be amazed. When he was shot during the recent When he was shot during the recent When he was shot during the recent campaign, I saw the same resilient and campaign, I saw the same resilient and campaign, I saw the same resilient and determined determined determined President President President Trump, the one who walked hand in hand Trump, the one who walked hand in hand Trump, the one who walked hand in hand with me in that with me in that with me in that stadium. Even after being shot, he stadium. Even after being shot, he stadium. Even after being shot, he remained unwaveringly dedicated to remained unwaveringly dedicated to remained unwaveringly dedicated to America. His life was for his nation. America. His life was for his nation. America. His life was for his nation. His reflection showed his America first His reflection showed his America first His reflection showed his America first spirit. Just as I believe in nation spirit. Just as I believe in nation spirit. Just as I believe in nation first, I stand for India first. And first, I stand for India first. And first, I stand for India first. And that's why we connect so well. These are that's why we connect so well. These are that's why we connect so well. These are the things the things the things that truly resonate. that truly resonate. that truly resonate. And I believe that across the world, And I believe that across the world, And I believe that across the world, politicians are covered so much by the politicians are covered so much by the politicians are covered so much by the media that people mostly perceive each media that people mostly perceive each media that people mostly perceive each other through its other through its other through its lens. People rarely get the chance to lens. People rarely get the chance to lens. People rarely get the chance to truly meet or personally know one truly meet or personally know one truly meet or personally know one another. And perhaps third party another. And perhaps third party another. And perhaps third party intervention is the real cause of intervention is the real cause of intervention is the real cause of tensions. tensions. tensions. When I visited him in the White House When I visited him in the White House When I visited him in the White House for the first time, there was already a lot written time, there was already a lot written time, there was already a lot written about President Trump in the media. At about President Trump in the media. At about President Trump in the media. At that time, he was still new to office that time, he was still new to office that time, he was still new to office and the world had a rather different and the world had a rather different and the world had a rather different perception of him. Even I had been perception of him. Even I had been perception of him. Even I had been briefed in many different ways before briefed in many different ways before briefed in many different ways before meeting him. But to my surprise, the meeting him. But to my surprise, the meeting him. But to my surprise, the very moment I stepped into the White very moment I stepped into the White very moment I stepped into the White House, he broke all formal protocols House, he broke all formal protocols House, he broke all formal protocols right away. right away. right away. And then he personally took me on a tour And then he personally took me on a tour And then he personally took me on a tour of the White House. As he showed me of the White House. As he showed me of the White House. As he showed me around, I noticed something striking. He around, I noticed something striking. He around, I noticed something striking. He wasn't holding any notes or Q cards, nor wasn't holding any notes or Q cards, nor wasn't holding any notes or Q cards, nor was anyone accompanying him to assist. was anyone accompanying him to assist. was anyone accompanying him to assist. He pointed things out himself. This is He pointed things out himself. This is He pointed things out himself. This is where Abraham Lincoln lived, he said. He where Abraham Lincoln lived, he said. He where Abraham Lincoln lived, he said. He even explained why the courtroom was even explained why the courtroom was even explained why the courtroom was designed so long. He would point at the designed so long. He would point at the designed so long. He would point at the table and tell me which president signed table and tell me which president signed table and tell me which president signed here and on what date. I found that here and on what date. I found that here and on what date. I found that incredibly incredibly incredibly impressive. It showed how much he impressive. It showed how much he impressive. It showed how much he honored the honored the honored the presidency and how respectful and deeply presidency and how respectful and deeply presidency and how respectful and deeply connected he was to America's history. I connected he was to America's history. I connected he was to America's history. I could feel that and he spoke to me could feel that and he spoke to me could feel that and he spoke to me freely discussing many things openly. freely discussing many things openly. freely discussing many things openly. That was my experience from our first That was my experience from our first That was my experience from our first meeting later when his first term meeting later when his first term meeting later when his first term ended ended ended and President Biden won. 4 years passed. But during that time whenever passed. But during that time whenever passed. But during that time whenever someone we both knew met someone we both knew met someone we both knew met him and this must have happened dozens him and this must have happened dozens him and this must have happened dozens of of of times he would say Modi is my friend. times he would say Modi is my friend. times he would say Modi is my friend. Convey my Convey my Convey my regards. That kind of gesture is rare. regards. That kind of gesture is rare. regards. That kind of gesture is rare. Even though we didn't meet physically Even though we didn't meet physically Even though we didn't meet physically for for for years, our direct and indirect years, our direct and indirect years, our direct and indirect communication, our closeness and the communication, our closeness and the communication, our closeness and the trust between us remained unshaken. He trust between us remained unshaken. He trust between us remained unshaken. He said that you're a much uh tougher, much said that you're a much uh tougher, much said that you're a much uh tougher, much better negotiator than he is. He said better negotiator than he is. He said better negotiator than he is. He said this recently when you this recently when you this recently when you visited. What do you think of him as a visited. What do you think of him as a visited. What do you think of him as a negotiator? And what do you think he negotiator? And what do you think he negotiator? And what do you think he meant about uh you being a great meant about uh you being a great meant about uh you being a great negotiator? Now that's not something I negotiator? Now that's not something I negotiator? Now that's not something I can comment on since it's his can comment on since it's his can comment on since it's his graciousness and graciousness and graciousness and humility. It humility. It humility. It is very kind of him that he openly is very kind of him that he openly is very kind of him that he openly appreciates me on various occasions and appreciates me on various occasions and appreciates me on various occasions and in different in different in different contexts. But about contexts. But about contexts. But about negotiation, I always put my country's negotiation, I always put my country's negotiation, I always put my country's interests first. interests first. interests first. That's why in every forum I speak up for That's why in every forum I speak up for That's why in every forum I speak up for India's India's India's interest not to harm interest not to harm interest not to harm anyone but in a positive manner and anyone but in a positive manner and anyone but in a positive manner and because of that no one takes because of that no one takes because of that no one takes offense. People know that if Modi is offense. People know that if Modi is offense. People know that if Modi is present he will strongly advocate for present he will strongly advocate for present he will strongly advocate for these things. After all the people of these things. After all the people of these things. After all the people of India have given me this responsibility. India have given me this responsibility. India have given me this responsibility. For me, my nation is my high command and For me, my nation is my high command and For me, my nation is my high command and I will always honor their will. You've I will always honor their will. You've I will always honor their will. You've also had a bunch of productive meetings also had a bunch of productive meetings also had a bunch of productive meetings with several other folks in your visit with several other folks in your visit with several other folks in your visit to the United States. Elon Musk, JD to the United States. Elon Musk, JD to the United States. Elon Musk, JD Vance, Tulsi Gabbard, Vance, Tulsi Gabbard, Vance, Tulsi Gabbard, VCwami. Uh what are some things that VCwami. Uh what are some things that VCwami. Uh what are some things that stood out from those meetings? Maybe key stood out from those meetings? Maybe key stood out from those meetings? Maybe key takeaways, key memories. Look, I can say takeaways, key memories. Look, I can say takeaways, key memories. Look, I can say this. I have observed President Trump this. I have observed President Trump this. I have observed President Trump both during his first term and now in both during his first term and now in both during his first term and now in his second run. This time he seems far his second run. This time he seems far his second run. This time he seems far more prepared than more prepared than more prepared than before. He has a clear road map in his before. He has a clear road map in his before. He has a clear road map in his mind with well-defined steps, each one mind with well-defined steps, each one mind with well-defined steps, each one designed to lead him toward his goals. designed to lead him toward his goals. designed to lead him toward his goals. I also had the chance to meet members of I also had the chance to meet members of I also had the chance to meet members of his team and I truly believe he has put his team and I truly believe he has put his team and I truly believe he has put together a strong capable together a strong capable together a strong capable group and with such a strong team I feel group and with such a strong team I feel group and with such a strong team I feel they are fully capable of implementing they are fully capable of implementing they are fully capable of implementing President Trump's vision based on my President Trump's vision based on my President Trump's vision based on my interactions with them. interactions with them. interactions with them. I met several people Tulsi I met several people Tulsi I met several people Tulsi Gabar, Vivec Raaswami, Elon Gabar, Vivec Raaswami, Elon Gabar, Vivec Raaswami, Elon Musk and there was a family-like Musk and there was a family-like Musk and there was a family-like atmosphere. Everyone had come with their atmosphere. Everyone had come with their atmosphere. Everyone had come with their families. As for Elon Musk, I have known families. As for Elon Musk, I have known families. As for Elon Musk, I have known him since my time as chief minister. He him since my time as chief minister. He him since my time as chief minister. He was there with his family and children. was there with his family and children. was there with his family and children. So naturally, the atmosphere felt warm So naturally, the atmosphere felt warm So naturally, the atmosphere felt warm and friendly. Of course, we had and friendly. Of course, we had and friendly. Of course, we had discussions and we talked about many discussions and we talked about many discussions and we talked about many different topics. now with this doge different topics. now with this doge different topics. now with this doge mission he is incredibly excited about mission he is incredibly excited about mission he is incredibly excited about how it's how it's how it's progressing and uh honestly it makes me progressing and uh honestly it makes me progressing and uh honestly it makes me happy too because when I took office in happy too because when I took office in happy too because when I took office in 2014 I wanted to free my country from 2014 I wanted to free my country from 2014 I wanted to free my country from the deeprooted issues and harmful the deeprooted issues and harmful the deeprooted issues and harmful practices that have crept in and I'll practices that have crept in and I'll practices that have crept in and I'll continue striving to eliminate as many continue striving to eliminate as many continue striving to eliminate as many of them as I possibly can for of them as I possibly can for of them as I possibly can for example after I took office in 2014. I example after I took office in 2014. I example after I took office in 2014. I observed that back then we weren't part observed that back then we weren't part observed that back then we weren't part of many global discussions not like how of many global discussions not like how of many global discussions not like how President Trump and Doge are being President Trump and Doge are being President Trump and Doge are being talked about today. But let me give you talked about today. But let me give you talked about today. But let me give you an example so you can see the kind of an example so you can see the kind of an example so you can see the kind of work that was done. I noticed that the work that was done. I noticed that the work that was done. I noticed that the benefits of certain government benefits of certain government benefits of certain government schemes, especially welfare programs, were being exploited by so programs, were being exploited by so programs, were being exploited by so many many many people who never even existed in real people who never even existed in real people who never even existed in real life. There were ghost names, pensions life. There were ghost names, pensions life. There were ghost names, pensions being issued to fake people. Bido being issued to fake people. Bido being issued to fake people. Bido pensions were being granted even before pensions were being granted even before pensions were being granted even before marriages took place and disability marriages took place and disability marriages took place and disability pensions were given without any real pensions were given without any real pensions were given without any real disabilities. Then I launched a scrutiny disabilities. Then I launched a scrutiny disabilities. Then I launched a scrutiny process and you'll be shocked to know process and you'll be shocked to know process and you'll be shocked to know what we what we what we found. 100 million found. 100 million found. 100 million people. 100 million people. 100 million people. 100 million people. That's 100 million fake or people. That's 100 million fake or people. That's 100 million fake or duplicate names that I remove from the duplicate names that I remove from the duplicate names that I remove from the system. And because of that we saved system. And because of that we saved system. And because of that we saved massive amount of money. Then I massive amount of money. Then I massive amount of money. Then I introduced direct benefit transfer introduced direct benefit transfer introduced direct benefit transfer ensuring that every rupee sent from ensuring that every rupee sent from ensuring that every rupee sent from Delhi reached the rightful person Delhi reached the rightful person Delhi reached the rightful person without without without leakage. As a result, my country saved leakage. As a result, my country saved leakage. As a result, my country saved nearly 3 trillion rupees that would have nearly 3 trillion rupees that would have nearly 3 trillion rupees that would have otherwise ended up in the wrong hands. otherwise ended up in the wrong hands. otherwise ended up in the wrong hands. Just because of direct benefit transfer Just because of direct benefit transfer Just because of direct benefit transfer through technology, we eliminated through technology, we eliminated through technology, we eliminated middlemen, ensuring transparency in the middlemen, ensuring transparency in the middlemen, ensuring transparency in the system. I also introduced the JM portal system. I also introduced the JM portal system. I also introduced the JM portal for government purchases which has for government purchases which has for government purchases which has helped save both time and money. It has helped save both time and money. It has helped save both time and money. It has increased competition and improved increased competition and improved increased competition and improved quality. In India, we had an quality. In India, we had an quality. In India, we had an overwhelming burden of compliances. I overwhelming burden of compliances. I overwhelming burden of compliances. I eliminated 40,000 unnecessary eliminated 40,000 unnecessary eliminated 40,000 unnecessary compliances and removed nearly 1,500 compliances and removed nearly 1,500 compliances and removed nearly 1,500 outdated laws that served no purpose. outdated laws that served no purpose. outdated laws that served no purpose. So in a way my efforts have been about So in a way my efforts have been about So in a way my efforts have been about freeing freeing freeing governance from unnecessary dominance governance from unnecessary dominance governance from unnecessary dominance and inefficiency and naturally when bold and inefficiency and naturally when bold and inefficiency and naturally when bold changes changes changes happen just like Doge's mission they happen just like Doge's mission they happen just like Doge's mission they become a topic of discussion become a topic of discussion become a topic of discussion worldwide. You have uh you and Ci worldwide. You have uh you and Ci worldwide. You have uh you and Ci Jinping have considered each other Jinping have considered each other Jinping have considered each other friends. How can that friendship be friends. How can that friendship be friends. How can that friendship be reinvigorated to help deescalate some of reinvigorated to help deescalate some of reinvigorated to help deescalate some of the recent tensions and resume dialogue the recent tensions and resume dialogue the recent tensions and resume dialogue and cooperation with and cooperation with and cooperation with China? Look, the relationship between India and China isn't something new. Both nations have Both nations have Both nations have ancient cultures and civilizations. Even in the modern world, civilizations. Even in the modern world, civilizations. Even in the modern world, they play a significant they play a significant they play a significant role. If you look at historical role. If you look at historical role. If you look at historical records, for records, for records, for centuries, India and China have learned centuries, India and China have learned centuries, India and China have learned from each from each from each other. Together they have other. Together they have other. Together they have always contributed to the global good in always contributed to the global good in always contributed to the global good in some way. Old records suggest that at some way. Old records suggest that at some way. Old records suggest that at one point India and China alone one point India and China alone one point India and China alone accounted for more than 50% of the accounted for more than 50% of the accounted for more than 50% of the world's world's world's GDP. That's how massive India's GDP. That's how massive India's GDP. That's how massive India's contribution contribution contribution was. And I was. And I was. And I believe our ties have been extremely believe our ties have been extremely believe our ties have been extremely strong with deep cultural connections. strong with deep cultural connections. strong with deep cultural connections. If we look back centuries, there's no If we look back centuries, there's no If we look back centuries, there's no real history of conflict between us. It real history of conflict between us. It real history of conflict between us. It has always been about learning from each has always been about learning from each has always been about learning from each other and understanding one another. At other and understanding one another. At other and understanding one another. At one time, Buddhism had a profound one time, Buddhism had a profound one time, Buddhism had a profound influence in influence in influence in China and that philosophy originally China and that philosophy originally China and that philosophy originally came from here. Our here. Our here. Our relationship should remain just as relationship should remain just as relationship should remain just as strong in the future. It should continue strong in the future. It should continue strong in the future. It should continue to grow. Of course, differences are to grow. Of course, differences are to grow. Of course, differences are natural when two neighboring countries natural when two neighboring countries natural when two neighboring countries exist. Occasional disagreements are exist. Occasional disagreements are exist. Occasional disagreements are bound to happen even within a family. bound to happen even within a family. bound to happen even within a family. Not everything is always Not everything is always Not everything is always perfect. But our focus is to ensure that perfect. But our focus is to ensure that perfect. But our focus is to ensure that these differences don't turn into these differences don't turn into these differences don't turn into disputes. That's what we actively work disputes. That's what we actively work disputes. That's what we actively work toward. Instead of toward. Instead of toward. Instead of discord, discord, discord, we we we emphasize emphasize emphasize dialogue dialogue dialogue because only through dialogue can we because only through dialogue can we because only through dialogue can we build a stable cooperative build a stable cooperative build a stable cooperative relationship that serves the best relationship that serves the best relationship that serves the best interests of both nations. interests of both nations. interests of both nations. It is true that there have been ongoing It is true that there have been ongoing It is true that there have been ongoing border disputes between border disputes between border disputes between us and in 2020 the incidents along the us and in 2020 the incidents along the us and in 2020 the incidents along the border created significant tensions border created significant tensions border created significant tensions between our countries. However, after my between our countries. However, after my between our countries. However, after my recent meeting with President Xi, we recent meeting with President Xi, we recent meeting with President Xi, we have seen a return to normaly at the have seen a return to normaly at the have seen a return to normaly at the border. We are now working to restore border. We are now working to restore border. We are now working to restore conditions to how they were before 2020. conditions to how they were before 2020. conditions to how they were before 2020. Slowly but surely, trust, enthusiasm, Slowly but surely, trust, enthusiasm, Slowly but surely, trust, enthusiasm, and energy will return. But of course, and energy will return. But of course, and energy will return. But of course, it will take some time since there's it will take some time since there's it will take some time since there's been a 5-year been a 5-year been a 5-year gap. Our cooperation isn't just gap. Our cooperation isn't just gap. Our cooperation isn't just beneficial, it's also essential for beneficial, it's also essential for beneficial, it's also essential for global stability and prosperity. And global stability and prosperity. And global stability and prosperity. And since the 21st century is Asia's since the 21st century is Asia's since the 21st century is Asia's century, we want India and China to century, we want India and China to century, we want India and China to compete in a healthy and natural way. compete in a healthy and natural way. compete in a healthy and natural way. Competition is not a bad thing, but it Competition is not a bad thing, but it Competition is not a bad thing, but it should never turn into conflict. The should never turn into conflict. The should never turn into conflict. The world is worried world is worried world is worried about a brewing global about a brewing global about a brewing global war. The tensions between China and the war. The tensions between China and the war. The tensions between China and the United United United States, in Ukraine, Russia, in Europe, States, in Ukraine, Russia, in Europe, States, in Ukraine, Russia, in Europe, in Israel, the Middle East. Uh what can in Israel, the Middle East. Uh what can in Israel, the Middle East. Uh what can you say about how we in the 21st century you say about how we in the 21st century you say about how we in the 21st century can avoid a global war, avoid an can avoid a global war, avoid an can avoid a global war, avoid an escalation towards more conflict, more escalation towards more conflict, more escalation towards more conflict, more war? Look, war? Look, war? Look, CO exposed the limitations of every CO exposed the limitations of every CO exposed the limitations of every nation. No matter how much we consider nation. No matter how much we consider nation. No matter how much we consider ourselves as a great nation, no matter ourselves as a great nation, no matter ourselves as a great nation, no matter how progressive we think we are or how how progressive we think we are or how how progressive we think we are or how scientifically advanced we believe we've scientifically advanced we believe we've scientifically advanced we believe we've become, everyone has their own way of become, everyone has their own way of become, everyone has their own way of looking at things. In the end, we all looking at things. In the end, we all looking at things. In the end, we all found ourselves on the same ground. found ourselves on the same ground. found ourselves on the same ground. Every country in the world faced this Every country in the world faced this Every country in the world faced this reality. At that time, it felt like the reality. At that time, it felt like the reality. At that time, it felt like the world would learn from it, that we would move toward a more it, that we would move toward a more it, that we would move toward a more unified world. unified world. unified world. Just as a geopolitical order emerged Just as a geopolitical order emerged Just as a geopolitical order emerged after World War after World War after World War II, many thought something similar would II, many thought something similar would II, many thought something similar would happen postco. But happen postco. But happen postco. But unfortunately, instead of moving towards of moving towards of moving towards peace, the world became even more peace, the world became even more peace, the world became even more fragmented, ushering in a period of fragmented, ushering in a period of fragmented, ushering in a period of uncertainty. uncertainty. uncertainty. And the wars have only made it worse. I believe that modern wars worse. I believe that modern wars worse. I believe that modern wars are no are no are no longer just about resources or interests. Today I see so interests. Today I see so interests. Today I see so many kinds of conflicts many kinds of conflicts many kinds of conflicts happening. Physical battles often get happening. Physical battles often get happening. Physical battles often get discussed. Struggles are happening in discussed. Struggles are happening in discussed. Struggles are happening in every every every domain. International organizations that domain. International organizations that domain. International organizations that were once powerful have become almost were once powerful have become almost were once powerful have become almost irrelevant. No real reforms are irrelevant. No real reforms are irrelevant. No real reforms are happening. Institutions like the UN are happening. Institutions like the UN are happening. Institutions like the UN are failing to fulfill their roles. People who disregard international laws and who disregard international laws and who disregard international laws and rules continue to act freely and no one rules continue to act freely and no one rules continue to act freely and no one can stop them. In such situations, the prudent choice for situations, the prudent choice for situations, the prudent choice for everyone is to let go of conflict and everyone is to let go of conflict and everyone is to let go of conflict and move toward move toward move toward cooperation and a developmentdriven approach is the and a developmentdriven approach is the and a developmentdriven approach is the way forward. Expansionism will not way forward. Expansionism will not way forward. Expansionism will not work. As I've said before, the world is work. As I've said before, the world is work. As I've said before, the world is interdependent and interconnected. Every interdependent and interconnected. Every interdependent and interconnected. Every nation needs one another. No one can nation needs one another. No one can nation needs one another. No one can stand stand stand alone. And from all the different forums alone. And from all the different forums alone. And from all the different forums I attend, one thing is I attend, one thing is I attend, one thing is clear. Everyone is deeply worried about clear. Everyone is deeply worried about clear. Everyone is deeply worried about these these these conflicts. We can only hope that peace conflicts. We can only hope that peace conflicts. We can only hope that peace is restored very soon. I'm not very careful. You keep looking I'm not very careful. You keep looking I'm not very careful. You keep looking at your want. at your want. at your want. No, no, no. I I barely know what I'm No, no, no. I I barely know what I'm No, no, no. I I barely know what I'm doing. Prime Minister, uh I'm not very doing. Prime Minister, uh I'm not very doing. Prime Minister, uh I'm not very good at this. good at this. good at this. Okay. In uh you've been through your Okay. In uh you've been through your Okay. In uh you've been through your career and through your life, you have career and through your life, you have career and through your life, you have seen a lot of difficult situations in seen a lot of difficult situations in seen a lot of difficult situations in the history of India. Uh one of them the the history of India. Uh one of them the the history of India. Uh one of them the 2002 2002 2002 uh Gujarat riots. uh they're one of the uh Gujarat riots. uh they're one of the uh Gujarat riots. uh they're one of the most challenging periods of modern most challenging periods of modern most challenging periods of modern Indian history when there was violence Indian history when there was violence Indian history when there was violence between Hindu and Muslim citizens of the between Hindu and Muslim citizens of the between Hindu and Muslim citizens of the Gujarat that led to over 1,000 deaths. Gujarat that led to over 1,000 deaths. Gujarat that led to over 1,000 deaths. It revealed uh the intensity of It revealed uh the intensity of It revealed uh the intensity of religious tensions in the region. You religious tensions in the region. You religious tensions in the region. You were, as you mentioned, chief minister were, as you mentioned, chief minister were, as you mentioned, chief minister of Gujarat at the time. Looking back, of Gujarat at the time. Looking back, of Gujarat at the time. Looking back, what lessons do you draw from that time? what lessons do you draw from that time? what lessons do you draw from that time? And we should also say that India's And we should also say that India's And we should also say that India's independent Supreme Court upheld twice independent Supreme Court upheld twice independent Supreme Court upheld twice in uh 12 and 22 that you had no in uh 12 and 22 that you had no in uh 12 and 22 that you had no involvement in the violence of the 2002 involvement in the violence of the 2002 involvement in the violence of the 2002 Gujarat riots. But I was wondering if Gujarat riots. But I was wondering if Gujarat riots. But I was wondering if you could speak to the broad lessons you you could speak to the broad lessons you you could speak to the broad lessons you draw from that time. draw from that time. draw from that time. Look, regarding Look, regarding Look, regarding your first your first your first point when you humbly said that you point when you humbly said that you point when you humbly said that you don't know what you're doing, that don't know what you're doing, that don't know what you're doing, that you're not good at this. I disagree and you're not good at this. I disagree and you're not good at this. I disagree and personally feel you've put in tremendous personally feel you've put in tremendous personally feel you've put in tremendous care. You've done extensive research and care. You've done extensive research and care. You've done extensive research and have dived deeply into every small have dived deeply into every small have dived deeply into every small detail. detail. detail. So I So I So I think you've done very well and all the think you've done very well and all the think you've done very well and all the efforts you put in during our efforts you put in during our efforts you put in during our conversation and in all your conversation and in all your conversation and in all your conversations are conversations are conversations are appreciated and rather appreciated and rather appreciated and rather than simply interviewing than simply interviewing than simply interviewing me. I feel you're trying to deeply me. I feel you're trying to deeply me. I feel you're trying to deeply understand India. That's why I strongly understand India. That's why I strongly understand India. That's why I strongly feel there's genuine honesty in your feel there's genuine honesty in your feel there's genuine honesty in your sincere effort to uncover the truth. And sincere effort to uncover the truth. And sincere effort to uncover the truth. And for that sincere approach, I genuinely for that sincere approach, I genuinely for that sincere approach, I genuinely congratulate you. Thank you. regarding congratulate you. Thank you. regarding congratulate you. Thank you. regarding the earlier events that you the earlier events that you the earlier events that you mentioned like the 2002 riots in mentioned like the 2002 riots in mentioned like the 2002 riots in Gujarat. I'd like to paint you a clearer Gujarat. I'd like to paint you a clearer Gujarat. I'd like to paint you a clearer picture of the 12 to 15 months leading picture of the 12 to 15 months leading picture of the 12 to 15 months leading up to that so you can fully up to that so you can fully up to that so you can fully understand the atmosphere of that time. understand the atmosphere of that time. understand the atmosphere of that time. For For For instance, take December 24, 1999. Roughly 3 years 1999. Roughly 3 years 1999. Roughly 3 years earlier, an Indian flight from Kathmandu earlier, an Indian flight from Kathmandu earlier, an Indian flight from Kathmandu to Delhi was to Delhi was to Delhi was hijacked, redirected to Afghanistan and hijacked, redirected to Afghanistan and hijacked, redirected to Afghanistan and landed in landed in landed in Kandahar. Hundreds of Indian passengers Kandahar. Hundreds of Indian passengers Kandahar. Hundreds of Indian passengers were held were held were held hostage. It caused massive turmoil hostage. It caused massive turmoil hostage. It caused massive turmoil across India as people faced life and across India as people faced life and across India as people faced life and death uncertainty. death uncertainty. death uncertainty. Then in the year 2000, the Red Fort in Then in the year 2000, the Red Fort in Then in the year 2000, the Red Fort in Delhi was attacked by Delhi was attacked by Delhi was attacked by terrorists. Yet another crisis struck terrorists. Yet another crisis struck terrorists. Yet another crisis struck the nation, intensifying fear and the nation, intensifying fear and the nation, intensifying fear and turmoil. On September 11th, 2001, the turmoil. On September 11th, 2001, the turmoil. On September 11th, 2001, the Twin Towers in America faced a Twin Towers in America faced a Twin Towers in America faced a devastating terror attack once again devastating terror attack once again devastating terror attack once again shocking the entire world. Because shocking the entire world. Because shocking the entire world. Because ultimately the people behind these ultimately the people behind these ultimately the people behind these attacks are driven by a similar mindset. attacks are driven by a similar mindset. attacks are driven by a similar mindset. Then in October 2001, terrorists Then in October 2001, terrorists Then in October 2001, terrorists attacked the Jammu and Kashmir assembly. attacked the Jammu and Kashmir assembly. attacked the Jammu and Kashmir assembly. Soon after on December 13, 2001, India's Soon after on December 13, 2001, India's Soon after on December 13, 2001, India's parliament was targeted. Within just 8 to 10 months, targeted. Within just 8 to 10 months, targeted. Within just 8 to 10 months, these major global terrorist these major global terrorist these major global terrorist attacks took place. Violent incidents attacks took place. Violent incidents attacks took place. Violent incidents that led to bloodshed and the loss of that led to bloodshed and the loss of that led to bloodshed and the loss of innocent lives. In such a tense innocent lives. In such a tense innocent lives. In such a tense environment, even the smallest spark can environment, even the smallest spark can environment, even the smallest spark can ignite unrest. The situation had already ignite unrest. The situation had already ignite unrest. The situation had already become extremely volatile. In such become extremely volatile. In such become extremely volatile. In such times, times, times, suddenly on October 7th, suddenly on October 7th, suddenly on October 7th, 2001, I was given the responsibility of 2001, I was given the responsibility of 2001, I was given the responsibility of becoming chief minister of Gujarat. This becoming chief minister of Gujarat. This becoming chief minister of Gujarat. This was an enormous was an enormous was an enormous challenge. At that time, Gujarat challenge. At that time, Gujarat challenge. At that time, Gujarat was recovering from a devastating was recovering from a devastating was recovering from a devastating earthquake, the largest of the previous earthquake, the largest of the previous earthquake, the largest of the previous century, which had left thousands dead. century, which had left thousands dead. century, which had left thousands dead. My first major task as chief minister My first major task as chief minister My first major task as chief minister was overseeing the rehabilitation of was overseeing the rehabilitation of was overseeing the rehabilitation of survivors. This was a crucial task and survivors. This was a crucial task and survivors. This was a crucial task and from day one after my oath, I immersed from day one after my oath, I immersed from day one after my oath, I immersed myself in it. I was a person who had myself in it. I was a person who had myself in it. I was a person who had absolutely no prior experience with absolutely no prior experience with absolutely no prior experience with government. I had never been part of any government. I had never been part of any government. I had never been part of any administration, never even served in administration, never even served in administration, never even served in government before. I had never contested government before. I had never contested government before. I had never contested an election, never even been a state an election, never even been a state an election, never even been a state representative. For the first time in my representative. For the first time in my representative. For the first time in my life, I had to face life, I had to face life, I had to face elections. On February 24, elections. On February 24, elections. On February 24, 2002, I became a state 2002, I became a state 2002, I became a state representative, an elected representative, an elected representative, an elected representative for the first time. representative for the first time. representative for the first time. And it was only around February 24th, And it was only around February 24th, And it was only around February 24th, 25th or 26th that I stepped into the 25th or 26th that I stepped into the 25th or 26th that I stepped into the Gujarat Assembly for the very first Gujarat Assembly for the very first Gujarat Assembly for the very first time. On February 27th, time. On February 27th, time. On February 27th, 2002, we were seated in the assembly for 2002, we were seated in the assembly for 2002, we were seated in the assembly for the budget session. And that same the budget session. And that same the budget session. And that same day, it had been just 3 days since I'd day, it had been just 3 days since I'd day, it had been just 3 days since I'd become an state become an state become an state representative. When suddenly the representative. When suddenly the representative. When suddenly the horrific Godra incident occurred, it was horrific Godra incident occurred, it was horrific Godra incident occurred, it was a tragedy of unimaginable magnitude. a tragedy of unimaginable magnitude. a tragedy of unimaginable magnitude. People were burned alive. You can People were burned alive. You can People were burned alive. You can imagine against the backdrop of imagine against the backdrop of imagine against the backdrop of incidents like the Kandahar hijacking, incidents like the Kandahar hijacking, incidents like the Kandahar hijacking, the attack on parliament or even the attack on parliament or even the attack on parliament or even 9/11. And 9/11. And 9/11. And then to have so then to have so then to have so many people killed and burned many people killed and burned many people killed and burned alive, you can imagine how tense and alive, you can imagine how tense and alive, you can imagine how tense and volatile the situation volatile the situation volatile the situation was. Of course, this was tragic for was. Of course, this was tragic for was. Of course, this was tragic for everyone. Everyone prefers peace. The perception that these were peace. The perception that these were peace. The perception that these were the biggest riots ever is actually the biggest riots ever is actually the biggest riots ever is actually misinformation. misinformation. misinformation. If you review the data from before 2002, If you review the data from before 2002, If you review the data from before 2002, you'll see that Gujarat faced frequent you'll see that Gujarat faced frequent you'll see that Gujarat faced frequent riots. Curfews were constantly being riots. Curfews were constantly being riots. Curfews were constantly being imposed somewhere. Communal violence imposed somewhere. Communal violence imposed somewhere. Communal violence could erupt over trivial issues like could erupt over trivial issues like could erupt over trivial issues like kite flying contests or even minor kite flying contests or even minor kite flying contests or even minor bicycle bicycle bicycle collisions. Before collisions. Before collisions. Before 2002, Gujarat witnessed over 250 2002, Gujarat witnessed over 250 2002, Gujarat witnessed over 250 significant riots. significant riots. significant riots. The riots in 1969 The riots in 1969 The riots in 1969 lasted nearly 6 months. So there was a long history long months. So there was a long history long months. So there was a long history long before I was in the before I was in the before I was in the picture. But that one tragic incident in picture. But that one tragic incident in picture. But that one tragic incident in 2002 became a sparking point leading 2002 became a sparking point leading 2002 became a sparking point leading some people towards violence. Yet the some people towards violence. Yet the some people towards violence. Yet the judiciary thoroughly investigated the judiciary thoroughly investigated the judiciary thoroughly investigated the matter. matter. matter. At that At that At that time our political opponents were in time our political opponents were in time our political opponents were in power and naturally they wanted all power and naturally they wanted all power and naturally they wanted all allegations against us to allegations against us to allegations against us to stick. Despite their relentless efforts, stick. Despite their relentless efforts, stick. Despite their relentless efforts, the the the judiciary analyzed the situation judiciary analyzed the situation judiciary analyzed the situation meticulously twice and ultimately found meticulously twice and ultimately found meticulously twice and ultimately found us completely innocent. Those who were us completely innocent. Those who were us completely innocent. Those who were truly responsible have faced justice truly responsible have faced justice truly responsible have faced justice from the courts. But the most important from the courts. But the most important from the courts. But the most important thing thing thing is in is in is in Gujarat where riots used to Gujarat where riots used to Gujarat where riots used to happen somewhere or the other every happen somewhere or the other every happen somewhere or the other every year but after year but after year but after 2002 in 22 years there hasn't been a 2002 in 22 years there hasn't been a 2002 in 22 years there hasn't been a single major riot in Gujarat. Gujarat single major riot in Gujarat. Gujarat single major riot in Gujarat. Gujarat remains completely peaceful. Our remains completely peaceful. Our remains completely peaceful. Our approach has always been to avoid vote approach has always been to avoid vote approach has always been to avoid vote bank politics. Instead, our mantra has bank politics. Instead, our mantra has bank politics. Instead, our mantra has been together with everyone, development been together with everyone, development been together with everyone, development for all, trust from all, and efforts by for all, trust from all, and efforts by for all, trust from all, and efforts by everyone. We've shifted away from the everyone. We've shifted away from the everyone. We've shifted away from the politics of appeasement to the politics politics of appeasement to the politics politics of appeasement to the politics of of of aspiration. Because of this, anyone who aspiration. Because of this, anyone who aspiration. Because of this, anyone who wishes to contribute joins us willingly. wishes to contribute joins us willingly. wishes to contribute joins us willingly. We've continuously strived to turn We've continuously strived to turn We've continuously strived to turn Gujarat into a well-developed state. And Gujarat into a well-developed state. And Gujarat into a well-developed state. And today, Gujarat is actively contributing today, Gujarat is actively contributing today, Gujarat is actively contributing toward building a developed India as toward building a developed India as toward building a developed India as well. well. well. A lot of people love you. I've got to A lot of people love you. I've got to A lot of people love you. I've got to hear from a lot of them. But there is hear from a lot of them. But there is hear from a lot of them. But there is also people who criticize you, including also people who criticize you, including also people who criticize you, including from the media. And folks in the media from the media. And folks in the media from the media. And folks in the media have criticized you over this have criticized you over this have criticized you over this uh 2002 Gujarat uh 2002 Gujarat uh 2002 Gujarat riots. What's your relationship like riots. What's your relationship like riots. What's your relationship like with with with criticism? What how do you deal with criticism? What how do you deal with criticism? What how do you deal with critics? How do you deal with criticism critics? How do you deal with criticism critics? How do you deal with criticism coming from the media or in your own coming from the media or in your own coming from the media or in your own inner circle or just in your own life? inner circle or just in your own life? inner circle or just in your own life? Look, regarding what you said about Look, regarding what you said about Look, regarding what you said about criticism and how I deal with it, if I criticism and how I deal with it, if I criticism and how I deal with it, if I had to summarize in one sentence, I had to summarize in one sentence, I had to summarize in one sentence, I welcome welcome welcome it. I have a strong it. I have a strong it. I have a strong belief belief belief that criticism is the soul of that criticism is the soul of that criticism is the soul of democracy. If democracy democracy. If democracy democracy. If democracy truly runs in your truly runs in your truly runs in your veins, you must embrace it. veins, you must embrace it. veins, you must embrace it. In our scriptures it In our scriptures it In our scriptures it said always keep your critics said always keep your critics said always keep your critics close. Critics should be your nearest close. Critics should be your nearest close. Critics should be your nearest companions because through genuine companions because through genuine companions because through genuine criticism you can improve quickly and criticism you can improve quickly and criticism you can improve quickly and work democratically with better work democratically with better work democratically with better insights. insights. insights. In In In fact, I believe we should have more fact, I believe we should have more fact, I believe we should have more criticism and it should be sharp and criticism and it should be sharp and criticism and it should be sharp and wellinformed. But my real complaint is wellinformed. But my real complaint is wellinformed. But my real complaint is that that that nowadays what we see isn't real nowadays what we see isn't real nowadays what we see isn't real criticism. Genuine criticism. Genuine criticism. Genuine criticism requires thorough study, criticism requires thorough study, criticism requires thorough study, in-depth research, and careful analysis. in-depth research, and careful analysis. in-depth research, and careful analysis. It demands finding the truth from It demands finding the truth from It demands finding the truth from falsehoods. falsehoods. falsehoods. Today people look for shortcuts, avoid Today people look for shortcuts, avoid Today people look for shortcuts, avoid proper research and skip deep proper research and skip deep proper research and skip deep analysis. Instead of identifying genuine analysis. Instead of identifying genuine analysis. Instead of identifying genuine weaknesses, they jump straight to accusations. There's a big difference accusations. There's a big difference accusations. There's a big difference between allegations and between allegations and between allegations and criticism. The references you're giving, criticism. The references you're giving, criticism. The references you're giving, they are allegations, not criticism. For they are allegations, not criticism. For they are allegations, not criticism. For a strong democracy, genuine criticism is a strong democracy, genuine criticism is a strong democracy, genuine criticism is necessary. necessary. necessary. Allegations benefit no one. They just Allegations benefit no one. They just Allegations benefit no one. They just cause unnecessary cause unnecessary cause unnecessary conflicts. That's conflicts. That's conflicts. That's why I always welcome criticism openly why I always welcome criticism openly why I always welcome criticism openly and whenever false accusations arise, I and whenever false accusations arise, I and whenever false accusations arise, I calmly continue serving my country with calmly continue serving my country with calmly continue serving my country with complete complete complete dedication. Yeah. the thing you speak of dedication. Yeah. the thing you speak of dedication. Yeah. the thing you speak of uh is very important to me because I uh is very important to me because I uh is very important to me because I admire great admire great admire great journalism and unfortunately in modern journalism and unfortunately in modern journalism and unfortunately in modern day a lot of day a lot of day a lot of journalists seek clickbait headlines journalists seek clickbait headlines journalists seek clickbait headlines make accusations because they operate make accusations because they operate make accusations because they operate under incentive because they want the under incentive because they want the under incentive because they want the headline the cheap shot. I think there headline the cheap shot. I think there headline the cheap shot. I think there is room and desire and hunger for great is room and desire and hunger for great is room and desire and hunger for great journalists and that requires deep journalists and that requires deep journalists and that requires deep understanding and it saddens me how understanding and it saddens me how understanding and it saddens me how often one of the reasons you know I often one of the reasons you know I often one of the reasons you know I don't think I'm very good at this but don't think I'm very good at this but don't think I'm very good at this but one of the reasons I really wanted to one of the reasons I really wanted to one of the reasons I really wanted to talk to you is because I don't see talk to you is because I don't see talk to you is because I don't see enough enough enough higheffort deep dive research I don't higheffort deep dive research I don't higheffort deep dive research I don't know how many books I've read I've read know how many books I've read I've read know how many books I've read I've read a lot in preparing just to experience a lot in preparing just to experience a lot in preparing just to experience just to try to understand it requires a just to try to understand it requires a just to try to understand it requires a lot lot of preparation, a lot of work. lot lot of preparation, a lot of work. lot lot of preparation, a lot of work. And I would love to see great And I would love to see great And I would love to see great journalists do that more. Uh, and from journalists do that more. Uh, and from journalists do that more. Uh, and from that place you can criticize. From that that place you can criticize. From that that place you can criticize. From that place, you can really investigate the place, you can really investigate the place, you can really investigate the complexity of a situation of people in complexity of a situation of people in complexity of a situation of people in power, their strengths, their flaws, the power, their strengths, their flaws, the power, their strengths, their flaws, the mistakes they have made. But that mistakes they have made. But that mistakes they have made. But that requires great great great preparation. requires great great great preparation. requires great great great preparation. So this uh I wish there was more of that So this uh I wish there was more of that So this uh I wish there was more of that of great journalism. Yes. Clear. of great journalism. Yes. Clear. of great journalism. Yes. Clear. Welldirected and specific criticism Welldirected and specific criticism Welldirected and specific criticism genuinely helps in the process of genuinely helps in the process of genuinely helps in the process of effective effective effective policym. It leads to a clear-cut policy policym. It leads to a clear-cut policy policym. It leads to a clear-cut policy vision. I specifically pay close vision. I specifically pay close vision. I specifically pay close attention to such constructive attention to such constructive attention to such constructive criticism. In fact, I actively welcome criticism. In fact, I actively welcome criticism. In fact, I actively welcome it. Regarding your point about it. Regarding your point about it. Regarding your point about journalistic journalistic journalistic headlines, if someone's attracted by headlines, if someone's attracted by headlines, if someone's attracted by catchy headlines or plays with words, I catchy headlines or plays with words, I catchy headlines or plays with words, I honestly don't mind that much. honestly don't mind that much. honestly don't mind that much. But when there's a deliberate agenda But when there's a deliberate agenda But when there's a deliberate agenda behind the actions and the truth is behind the actions and the truth is behind the actions and the truth is deliberately deliberately deliberately ignored, that can cause damage that ignored, that can cause damage that ignored, that can cause damage that lasts for lasts for lasts for decades. If someone focuses on pleasing decades. If someone focuses on pleasing decades. If someone focuses on pleasing their readers or their readers or their readers or viewers with attractive viewers with attractive viewers with attractive headlines, maybe we can compromise a headlines, maybe we can compromise a headlines, maybe we can compromise a little. But if there's a hidden motive little. But if there's a hidden motive little. But if there's a hidden motive or if things are intentionally twisted or if things are intentionally twisted or if things are intentionally twisted to serve an agenda, that's a serious to serve an agenda, that's a serious to serve an agenda, that's a serious issue worth worrying about. And in that issue worth worrying about. And in that issue worth worrying about. And in that the truth suffers. I think I remember the truth suffers. I think I remember the truth suffers. I think I remember once in once in once in London, I was invited to give a London, I was invited to give a London, I was invited to give a speech at an event organized by a speech at an event organized by a speech at an event organized by a Gujarati newspaper there. So during my Gujarati newspaper there. So during my Gujarati newspaper there. So during my speech I casually said since it was an speech I casually said since it was an speech I casually said since it was an event attended by journalists, what kind of journalism journalists, what kind of journalism journalists, what kind of journalism should we should we should we have? Should it be like a fly or a bee? I explained a bee? I explained a bee? I explained a fly sits on fly sits on fly sits on dirt and spreads the dirt dirt and spreads the dirt dirt and spreads the dirt around. But a around. But a around. But a bee lands on flowers, collects nectar, bee lands on flowers, collects nectar, bee lands on flowers, collects nectar, and then shares that sweetness and then shares that sweetness and then shares that sweetness everywhere. Yet, if something wrong everywhere. Yet, if something wrong everywhere. Yet, if something wrong occurs, the bee can sting so occurs, the bee can sting so occurs, the bee can sting so powerfully that you'd have to hide your powerfully that you'd have to hide your powerfully that you'd have to hide your face for 3 days face for 3 days face for 3 days straight. straight. straight. However, some people selectively picked However, some people selectively picked However, some people selectively picked up just half of my analogy and created a up just half of my analogy and created a up just half of my analogy and created a huge controversy out of it. Honestly, huge controversy out of it. Honestly, huge controversy out of it. Honestly, was I being negative about was I being negative about was I being negative about anyone? Not at all. I was simply anyone? Not at all. I was simply anyone? Not at all. I was simply highlighting the incredible strength of highlighting the incredible strength of highlighting the incredible strength of a bee that even its small sting can a bee that even its small sting can a bee that even its small sting can leave such an impact that can make leave such an impact that can make leave such an impact that can make someone hide their face for days. You someone hide their face for days. You someone hide their face for days. You can't show your face. That's the power can't show your face. That's the power can't show your face. That's the power journalism should journalism should journalism should have. But unfortunately, some people have. But unfortunately, some people have. But unfortunately, some people prefer the fly approach instead. prefer the fly approach instead. prefer the fly approach instead. I I now have a new life goal of becoming I I now have a new life goal of becoming I I now have a new life goal of becoming the bee. You mentioned democracy. So, the bee. You mentioned democracy. So, the bee. You mentioned democracy. So, and not knowing much about government and not knowing much about government and not knowing much about government until until until 2002. But two from 2002 to today, you 2002. But two from 2002 to today, you 2002. But two from 2002 to today, you won eight elections that I could won eight elections that I could won eight elections that I could count. So many of the elections over 800 count. So many of the elections over 800 count. So many of the elections over 800 million people vote in million people vote in million people vote in India. What does it take to win an India. What does it take to win an India. What does it take to win an election like that? election like that? election like that? uh and to win an election of 1.4 billion uh and to win an election of 1.4 billion uh and to win an election of 1.4 billion people where you get to represent those people where you get to represent those people where you get to represent those people, the biggest democracy in the people, the biggest democracy in the people, the biggest democracy in the world. Well, I've been actively involved world. Well, I've been actively involved world. Well, I've been actively involved in politics for years. Before stepping in politics for years. Before stepping in politics for years. Before stepping into active politics, my focus was into active politics, my focus was into active politics, my focus was primarily on organizational work. This primarily on organizational work. This primarily on organizational work. This also included managing elections and also included managing elections and also included managing elections and strategizing campaigns. So that was strategizing campaigns. So that was strategizing campaigns. So that was where I dedicated my time for 24 where I dedicated my time for 24 where I dedicated my time for 24 years. The years. The years. The people of Gujarat and India have placed people of Gujarat and India have placed people of Gujarat and India have placed their trust in me to their trust in me to their trust in me to lead with unwavering dedication and a lead with unwavering dedication and a lead with unwavering dedication and a deep sense of duty. deep sense of duty. deep sense of duty. I try to fulfill the sacred I try to fulfill the sacred I try to fulfill the sacred duty entrusted to duty entrusted to duty entrusted to me by the people I rever as me by the people I rever as me by the people I rever as divine. I remain committed to honoring divine. I remain committed to honoring divine. I remain committed to honoring their trust, ensuring it never falters. And they see me for what I falters. And they see me for what I falters. And they see me for what I truly am. truly am. truly am. My government is committed My government is committed My government is committed to ensuring welfare schemes reach every to ensuring welfare schemes reach every to ensuring welfare schemes reach every citizen. Every scheme must reach its citizen. Every scheme must reach its citizen. Every scheme must reach its intended intended intended beneficiaries. Every beneficiaries. Every beneficiaries. Every beneficiary must be treated equally. No beneficiary must be treated equally. No beneficiary must be treated equally. No one should face discrimination on cast, one should face discrimination on cast, one should face discrimination on cast, creed, faith, wealth or ideology. We creed, faith, wealth or ideology. We creed, faith, wealth or ideology. We must strive to ensure the well-being and must strive to ensure the well-being and must strive to ensure the well-being and prosperity of everyone. prosperity of everyone. prosperity of everyone. This This This way, even those not directly way, even those not directly way, even those not directly benefiting never feel left out or benefiting never feel left out or benefiting never feel left out or treated unfairly. They find comfort in treated unfairly. They find comfort in treated unfairly. They find comfort in knowing they too will benefit in due knowing they too will benefit in due knowing they too will benefit in due course. This fosters a deep sense of course. This fosters a deep sense of course. This fosters a deep sense of trust and trust is the trust and trust is the trust and trust is the cornerstone of my governance model. cornerstone of my governance model. cornerstone of my governance model. Secondly, my Secondly, my Secondly, my governance flows governance flows governance flows beyond the eb and flow of beyond the eb and flow of beyond the eb and flow of elections. My governance is rooted in elections. My governance is rooted in elections. My governance is rooted in the people, not the polls. It is the people, not the polls. It is the people, not the polls. It is committed to the well-being of my committed to the well-being of my committed to the well-being of my citizens and the greater good of the citizens and the greater good of the citizens and the greater good of the nation. As you may know, I had once set nation. As you may know, I had once set nation. As you may know, I had once set out on a quest for spiritual awakening. out on a quest for spiritual awakening. out on a quest for spiritual awakening. So now I rever my nation as the divine So now I rever my nation as the divine So now I rever my nation as the divine itself and I now rever the people as the itself and I now rever the people as the itself and I now rever the people as the manifestation of the manifestation of the manifestation of the divine like a devoted divine like a devoted divine like a devoted priest. My heart is set on serving the priest. My heart is set on serving the priest. My heart is set on serving the people. I don't distance myself from the people. I don't distance myself from the people. I don't distance myself from the people. I live among them as one of people. I live among them as one of people. I live among them as one of them. And I tell everyone I work with if them. And I tell everyone I work with if them. And I tell everyone I work with if you work hard I will work harder. People you work hard I will work harder. People you work hard I will work harder. People see this and it builds trust. Besides, I see this and it builds trust. Besides, I see this and it builds trust. Besides, I have no conflicts of interest. I have no have no conflicts of interest. I have no have no conflicts of interest. I have no friends or relatives who stand to gain friends or relatives who stand to gain friends or relatives who stand to gain from the position I hold. The common man from the position I hold. The common man from the position I hold. The common man appreciates this lack of vested appreciates this lack of vested appreciates this lack of vested interests. And that's probably just one interests. And that's probably just one interests. And that's probably just one reason reason reason why. Moreover, I come from a party with why. Moreover, I come from a party with why. Moreover, I come from a party with millions of dedicated volunteers. millions of dedicated volunteers. millions of dedicated volunteers. volunteers who are completely devoted to volunteers who are completely devoted to volunteers who are completely devoted to the welfare of India and its citizens. the welfare of India and its citizens. the welfare of India and its citizens. They have had no stake whatsoever in They have had no stake whatsoever in They have had no stake whatsoever in politics. They've held no title nor politics. They've held no title nor politics. They've held no title nor stray where influence holds sway. My stray where influence holds sway. My stray where influence holds sway. My party is blessed with millions of party is blessed with millions of party is blessed with millions of volunteers who work tirelessly. I am volunteers who work tirelessly. I am volunteers who work tirelessly. I am proud to belong to the proud to belong to the proud to belong to the world's largest political world's largest political world's largest political party and it's not like my party has party and it's not like my party has party and it's not like my party has been around forever. It reflects the been around forever. It reflects the been around forever. It reflects the hard work of millions of volunteers. hard work of millions of volunteers. hard work of millions of volunteers. Their selfless service is widely Their selfless service is widely Their selfless service is widely recognized and valued by the recognized and valued by the recognized and valued by the community. It fortifies people's trust community. It fortifies people's trust community. It fortifies people's trust in the BJP echoed in the election in the BJP echoed in the election in the BJP echoed in the election results. I never tallied our election results. I never tallied our election results. I never tallied our election triumphs but we have had people's triumphs but we have had people's triumphs but we have had people's blessings. blessings. blessings. I was wondering if you could speak to I was wondering if you could speak to I was wondering if you could speak to the incredible logistics that blew my the incredible logistics that blew my the incredible logistics that blew my mind of running the elections in India. mind of running the elections in India. mind of running the elections in India. So there's a lot of interesting So there's a lot of interesting So there's a lot of interesting anecdotes that arise. Uh for example, anecdotes that arise. Uh for example, anecdotes that arise. Uh for example, that no voter should be more than 2 that no voter should be more than 2 that no voter should be more than 2 kilometers away from a polling station. kilometers away from a polling station. kilometers away from a polling station. The result of that is you have these The result of that is you have these The result of that is you have these stories of voting machines having to be stories of voting machines having to be stories of voting machines having to be carried to remote regions of India is carried to remote regions of India is carried to remote regions of India is really incredible. just every single really incredible. just every single really incredible. just every single voter counts and the machinery of having voter counts and the machinery of having voter counts and the machinery of having 600 plus million people 600 plus million people 600 plus million people vote. Is there some u vote. Is there some u vote. Is there some u anecdote you you could uh speak to that anecdote you you could uh speak to that anecdote you you could uh speak to that is particularly impressive to you? Or is particularly impressive to you? Or is particularly impressive to you? Or maybe you could speak generally to the maybe you could speak generally to the maybe you could speak generally to the logistics of what it makes to run an logistics of what it makes to run an logistics of what it makes to run an election that big, a democracy that big. election that big, a democracy that big. election that big, a democracy that big. First and foremost, I am First and foremost, I am First and foremost, I am truly grateful for your insightful truly grateful for your insightful truly grateful for your insightful question. Anyone who believes in question. Anyone who believes in question. Anyone who believes in democracy should listen to what I am democracy should listen to what I am democracy should listen to what I am about to share with about to share with about to share with you. We often discuss election results, you. We often discuss election results, you. We often discuss election results, but all the behind-the-scenes work is but all the behind-the-scenes work is but all the behind-the-scenes work is overlooked. Let's take the recently overlooked. Let's take the recently overlooked. Let's take the recently concluded 2024 general elections as an concluded 2024 general elections as an concluded 2024 general elections as an example. example. example. There were 980 There were 980 There were 980 million registered voters. Each of those voters had a voters. Each of those voters had a voters. Each of those voters had a registered ID and all the necessary registered ID and all the necessary registered ID and all the necessary details in a vast details in a vast details in a vast database. And this number is twice the database. And this number is twice the database. And this number is twice the entire population of North entire population of North entire population of North America. It even surpasses the total America. It even surpasses the total America. It even surpasses the total population of the entire European Union. population of the entire European Union. population of the entire European Union. Out of the 980 million registered Out of the 980 million registered Out of the 980 million registered voters, voters, voters, 646 million 646 million 646 million people ventured people ventured people ventured out and braved the intense heat of May, out and braved the intense heat of May, out and braved the intense heat of May, determined to cast their determined to cast their determined to cast their votes. Temperatures soared to 40° in votes. Temperatures soared to 40° in votes. Temperatures soared to 40° in some areas, yet they chose to go. And some areas, yet they chose to go. And some areas, yet they chose to go. And the size of this voter base is double the size of this voter base is double the size of this voter base is double the population of the United States. the population of the United States. the population of the United States. We had more than a million polling We had more than a million polling We had more than a million polling booths. Can you fathom all the manpower booths. Can you fathom all the manpower booths. Can you fathom all the manpower involved in involved in involved in this? My country has more than 2,500 this? My country has more than 2,500 this? My country has more than 2,500 registered political registered political registered political parties. This staggering figure with parties. This staggering figure with parties. This staggering figure with such a vast array of political parties such a vast array of political parties such a vast array of political parties has the power to leave the entire world has the power to leave the entire world has the power to leave the entire world in awe. in awe. in awe. My My My country has more than 900 roundthe-clock country has more than 900 roundthe-clock country has more than 900 roundthe-clock news channels. There are over 5,000 channels. There are over 5,000 channels. There are over 5,000 newspapers published daily. They each newspapers published daily. They each newspapers published daily. They each play a role in upholding democracy in play a role in upholding democracy in play a role in upholding democracy in their own way. Even the humblest villages here the humblest villages here the humblest villages here embrace technology with remarkable embrace technology with remarkable embrace technology with remarkable swiftness. While some other swiftness. While some other swiftness. While some other countries take months to declare countries take months to declare countries take months to declare election election election results, we announced the results within results, we announced the results within results, we announced the results within a day despite the mind-boggling number a day despite the mind-boggling number a day despite the mind-boggling number of voters. And you were spot on in of voters. And you were spot on in of voters. And you were spot on in saying that even the remotest villages saying that even the remotest villages saying that even the remotest villages have polling stations. We even use have polling stations. We even use have polling stations. We even use helicopters to transport polling helicopters to transport polling helicopters to transport polling stations. I believe Arunachal stations. I believe Arunachal stations. I believe Arunachal Pradesh has the highest altitude polling Pradesh has the highest altitude polling Pradesh has the highest altitude polling booth on record. In Gujarat, a polling booth on record. In Gujarat, a polling booth on record. In Gujarat, a polling booth was set up in the Gear Forest for booth was set up in the Gear Forest for booth was set up in the Gear Forest for just one voter who was in the middle of just one voter who was in the middle of just one voter who was in the middle of nowhere. But we ensured a polling booth nowhere. But we ensured a polling booth nowhere. But we ensured a polling booth was set up for them. All I mean to say was set up for them. All I mean to say was set up for them. All I mean to say is that we that we that we truly leave no stone unturned in our truly leave no stone unturned in our truly leave no stone unturned in our unwavering commitment to strengthening unwavering commitment to strengthening unwavering commitment to strengthening democracy, ensuring that we are always democracy, ensuring that we are always democracy, ensuring that we are always fully prepared and election fully prepared and election fully prepared and election ready no matter the circumstances. I ready no matter the circumstances. I ready no matter the circumstances. I firmly believe that India's election firmly believe that India's election firmly believe that India's election commission sets a global standard as a commission sets a global standard as a commission sets a global standard as a benchmark for conducting free and fair benchmark for conducting free and fair benchmark for conducting free and fair elections. It is the apex decision elections. It is the apex decision elections. It is the apex decision maker. This in itself is such a maker. This in itself is such a maker. This in itself is such a remarkable story that the world's top remarkable story that the world's top remarkable story that the world's top universities should consider it a case universities should consider it a case universities should consider it a case study. They should analyze the study. They should analyze the study. They should analyze the management behind it as a valuable management behind it as a valuable management behind it as a valuable learning example. learning example. learning example. Given the sheer number of voters, can Given the sheer number of voters, can Given the sheer number of voters, can you truly grasp the immense depth of you truly grasp the immense depth of you truly grasp the immense depth of political political political awareness? All of this will make for an awareness? All of this will make for an awareness? All of this will make for an excellent case study for the younger excellent case study for the younger excellent case study for the younger generation generation generation worldwide. Uh to me, I love worldwide. Uh to me, I love worldwide. Uh to me, I love democracy. This is one of the main democracy. This is one of the main democracy. This is one of the main reasons uh I love the United States, but reasons uh I love the United States, but reasons uh I love the United States, but there's just nothing quite as beautiful there's just nothing quite as beautiful there's just nothing quite as beautiful as democracy when it functions in India. as democracy when it functions in India. as democracy when it functions in India. You know, like you said, 900 million You know, like you said, 900 million You know, like you said, 900 million people registered to vote. It's it people registered to vote. It's it people registered to vote. It's it really is a case study. It's beautiful really is a case study. It's beautiful really is a case study. It's beautiful to see that many people come together to see that many people come together to see that many people come together willingly, passionately casting a vote willingly, passionately casting a vote willingly, passionately casting a vote for some person to represent them. Like for some person to represent them. Like for some person to represent them. Like they're putting their heart in that. they're putting their heart in that. they're putting their heart in that. It's really important for a person to It's really important for a person to It's really important for a person to feel like their voice is going to be feel like their voice is going to be feel like their voice is going to be heard. It's beautiful. Speaking of heard. It's beautiful. Speaking of heard. It's beautiful. Speaking of which, you are loved by a lot of people. which, you are loved by a lot of people. which, you are loved by a lot of people. You are one of the most powerful humans You are one of the most powerful humans You are one of the most powerful humans in the world. Do you sometimes think in the world. Do you sometimes think in the world. Do you sometimes think about whether this much power has a about whether this much power has a about whether this much power has a corrupting effect on your corrupting effect on your corrupting effect on your mind, especially across the many years mind, especially across the many years mind, especially across the many years that you've been in that you've been in that you've been in power? Well, I don't think the word power? Well, I don't think the word power? Well, I don't think the word powerful quite reflects the journey of powerful quite reflects the journey of powerful quite reflects the journey of my life. my life. my life. I can never claim to be I can never claim to be I can never claim to be powerful for all I am is a humble powerful for all I am is a humble powerful for all I am is a humble servant. I even identify myself as not servant. I even identify myself as not servant. I even identify myself as not the prime minister but the prime servant the prime minister but the prime servant the prime minister but the prime servant and service is the guiding principle of and service is the guiding principle of and service is the guiding principle of my work my work my work ethic. As far as power is concerned, it ethic. As far as power is concerned, it ethic. As far as power is concerned, it is something I have never bothered is something I have never bothered is something I have never bothered about. about. about. I entered politics not to play power I entered politics not to play power I entered politics not to play power games but to games but to games but to serve. Rather than seeking serve. Rather than seeking serve. Rather than seeking power, I stay committed to doing and power, I stay committed to doing and power, I stay committed to doing and getting work done. I am more focused on getting work done. I am more focused on getting work done. I am more focused on productivity than productivity than productivity than power. I have always dedicated myself to power. I have always dedicated myself to power. I have always dedicated myself to serving the people. I have always serving the people. I have always serving the people. I have always devoted myself to bringing about a devoted myself to bringing about a devoted myself to bringing about a positive change in their lives. positive change in their lives. positive change in their lives. Like you mentioned, you work a lot. You Like you mentioned, you work a lot. You Like you mentioned, you work a lot. You give your whole soul to your give your whole soul to your give your whole soul to your work. Do you ever get lonely? Look, I never experience loneliness because I am an ardent loneliness because I am an ardent loneliness because I am an ardent believer in the philosophy of 1 + believer in the philosophy of 1 + believer in the philosophy of 1 + 1. And this philosophy of 1 + 1. And this philosophy of 1 + 1. And this philosophy of 1 + 1 is aligned 1 is aligned 1 is aligned with my moral with my moral with my moral compass. And whenever I am asked to compass. And whenever I am asked to compass. And whenever I am asked to elaborate on this elaborate on this elaborate on this outlook, I say the first one represents outlook, I say the first one represents outlook, I say the first one represents Modi and the other one represents the Modi and the other one represents the Modi and the other one represents the Almighty. I am never alone for he is Almighty. I am never alone for he is Almighty. I am never alone for he is always there to keep me company. always there to keep me company. always there to keep me company. This is just how I This is just how I This is just how I function. Having wholeheartedly embraced function. Having wholeheartedly embraced function. Having wholeheartedly embraced the ideals of Swami Vivacananda. I firmly believe that Vivacananda. I firmly believe that Vivacananda. I firmly believe that service to mankind is service to service to mankind is service to service to mankind is service to God. For me, the nation itself is divine God. For me, the nation itself is divine God. For me, the nation itself is divine and mankind is a reflection of the and mankind is a reflection of the and mankind is a reflection of the divine. I walk this path with the divine. I walk this path with the divine. I walk this path with the conviction that serving the people is conviction that serving the people is conviction that serving the people is serving the divine. serving the divine. serving the divine. That's why the very notion That's why the very notion That's why the very notion of struggling with of struggling with of struggling with loneliness has never even remotely loneliness has never even remotely loneliness has never even remotely crossed my mind. like at the time of pandemic with the lockdown and traveling pandemic with the lockdown and traveling pandemic with the lockdown and traveling restrictions in restrictions in restrictions in place. I came up with a place. I came up with a place. I came up with a way to make the most of my way to make the most of my way to make the most of my time. I designed time. I designed time. I designed a governance model that operated a governance model that operated a governance model that operated seamlessly through video conferencing. seamlessly through video conferencing. seamlessly through video conferencing. I kept myself occupied I kept myself occupied I kept myself occupied with remote work and virtual with remote work and virtual with remote work and virtual meetings. Another thing I did was to meetings. Another thing I did was to meetings. Another thing I did was to connect with the people I had worked connect with the people I had worked connect with the people I had worked with throughout my with throughout my with throughout my life. Among my parties volunteers life. Among my parties volunteers life. Among my parties volunteers nationwide, I made a list of those who nationwide, I made a list of those who nationwide, I made a list of those who were 70 and were 70 and were 70 and older. Some of the older. Some of the older. Some of the volunteers had very humble beginnings volunteers had very humble beginnings volunteers had very humble beginnings and came and came and came from very modest backgrounds. I from very modest backgrounds. I from very modest backgrounds. I personally called every volunteer aged personally called every volunteer aged personally called every volunteer aged 70 and 70 and 70 and above. I made it a point to inquire above. I made it a point to inquire above. I made it a point to inquire about their health and their family's about their health and their family's about their health and their family's well-being. I inquired about how their well-being. I inquired about how their well-being. I inquired about how their area was coping. I asked these questions area was coping. I asked these questions area was coping. I asked these questions to make sure they were doing well. This to make sure they were doing well. This to make sure they were doing well. This allowed me to build rapport with them allowed me to build rapport with them allowed me to build rapport with them and we would go down the memory lane. and we would go down the memory lane. and we would go down the memory lane. They were touched that the prime They were touched that the prime They were touched that the prime minister would check on them in the minister would check on them in the minister would check on them in the pandemic. pandemic. pandemic. I made around 40 calls every day without I made around 40 calls every day without I made around 40 calls every day without fail. I carried on with this throughout fail. I carried on with this throughout fail. I carried on with this throughout the pandemic. It gave me the chance to the pandemic. It gave me the chance to the pandemic. It gave me the chance to reconnect and relive old memories with reconnect and relive old memories with reconnect and relive old memories with familiar faces. Loneliness is never a familiar faces. Loneliness is never a familiar faces. Loneliness is never a concern for me as I always find ways to concern for me as I always find ways to concern for me as I always find ways to stay stay stay engaged. And I have long been at peace engaged. And I have long been at peace engaged. And I have long been at peace with myself. The time I spent in the with myself. The time I spent in the with myself. The time I spent in the Himalayas have helped me develop this. Himalayas have helped me develop this. Himalayas have helped me develop this. I've heard from many people uh that you I've heard from many people uh that you I've heard from many people uh that you are the hardest worker they know. Uh are the hardest worker they know. Uh are the hardest worker they know. Uh what's your philosophy behind that? what's your philosophy behind that? what's your philosophy behind that? Maybe you put in crazy hours every Maybe you put in crazy hours every Maybe you put in crazy hours every single day. Do you ever get tired? What single day. Do you ever get tired? What single day. Do you ever get tired? What what what's your source of strength and what what's your source of strength and what what's your source of strength and uh perseverance through all of that? uh perseverance through all of that? uh perseverance through all of that? Look, first of all, I don't believe I'm Look, first of all, I don't believe I'm Look, first of all, I don't believe I'm the only one working. I look at the the only one working. I look at the the only one working. I look at the people around me and always think, people around me and always think, people around me and always think, "These people work harder than I "These people work harder than I "These people work harder than I do." When I think about farmers, I do." When I think about farmers, I do." When I think about farmers, I realize how hard they realize how hard they realize how hard they work. They toil and sweat under the open work. They toil and sweat under the open work. They toil and sweat under the open sky day after day. When I look at our sky day after day. When I look at our sky day after day. When I look at our country's soldiers, I think about how country's soldiers, I think about how country's soldiers, I think about how many hours someone spends working many hours someone spends working many hours someone spends working tirelessly in snow, deserts, or even tirelessly in snow, deserts, or even tirelessly in snow, deserts, or even underwater day and night. When I see a underwater day and night. When I see a underwater day and night. When I see a laborer, I think about how hard they're laborer, I think about how hard they're laborer, I think about how hard they're working. working. working. I always think about how hard our I always think about how hard our I always think about how hard our mothers and sisters work in every family mothers and sisters work in every family mothers and sisters work in every family for the happiness of the for the happiness of the for the happiness of the family. They're the first to wake up and family. They're the first to wake up and family. They're the first to wake up and the last to go to bed taking care of the last to go to bed taking care of the last to go to bed taking care of everyone in the family while also everyone in the family while also everyone in the family while also managing social managing social managing social responsibilities. Thinking of all this, responsibilities. Thinking of all this, responsibilities. Thinking of all this, I'm in awe of how hard people I'm in awe of how hard people I'm in awe of how hard people work. So I think how can I sleep? How work. So I think how can I sleep? How work. So I think how can I sleep? How can I relax? So naturally, the can I relax? So naturally, the can I relax? So naturally, the motivation is right in front of my eyes. motivation is right in front of my eyes. motivation is right in front of my eyes. Those very things around me keep me Those very things around me keep me Those very things around me keep me motivated. Secondly, my responsibilities motivated. Secondly, my responsibilities motivated. Secondly, my responsibilities keep pushing me keep pushing me keep pushing me forward. The responsibilities entrusted forward. The responsibilities entrusted forward. The responsibilities entrusted to me by my fellow citizens always to me by my fellow citizens always to me by my fellow citizens always remind me that I'm not here to enjoy remind me that I'm not here to enjoy remind me that I'm not here to enjoy privileges. I will always give it my privileges. I will always give it my privileges. I will always give it my absolute best. Perhaps there are a absolute best. Perhaps there are a absolute best. Perhaps there are a couple of things I may not couple of things I may not couple of things I may not accomplish, but there will never be a accomplish, but there will never be a accomplish, but there will never be a lack of effort or hard work from me. And lack of effort or hard work from me. And lack of effort or hard work from me. And when I was campaigning in when I was campaigning in when I was campaigning in 2014, I had made a promise first in 2014, I had made a promise first in 2014, I had made a promise first in Gujarat and later across Gujarat and later across Gujarat and later across India. I promised my fellow India. I promised my fellow India. I promised my fellow citizens citizens citizens that I will that I will that I will never fall behind in hard work for my never fall behind in hard work for my never fall behind in hard work for my country. country. country. Secondly, I Secondly, I Secondly, I promised I would never act with bad promised I would never act with bad promised I would never act with bad intentions. And thirdly, I vowed I'd intentions. And thirdly, I vowed I'd intentions. And thirdly, I vowed I'd never do anything for personal gain. never do anything for personal gain. never do anything for personal gain. Today, it's been 24 Today, it's been 24 Today, it's been 24 years for such a long years for such a long years for such a long period. The people have entrusted me as period. The people have entrusted me as period. The people have entrusted me as head of head of head of government. I've continuously held government. I've continuously held government. I've continuously held myself to these three myself to these three myself to these three standards and I still live by them standards and I still live by them standards and I still live by them today. My inspiration comes from serving today. My inspiration comes from serving today. My inspiration comes from serving 1.4 billion people from understanding 1.4 billion people from understanding 1.4 billion people from understanding and fulfilling their and fulfilling their and fulfilling their aspirations and aspirations and aspirations and addressing their addressing their addressing their needs. I'm always determined to do as needs. I'm always determined to do as needs. I'm always determined to do as much as I can work as hard as possible. much as I can work as hard as possible. much as I can work as hard as possible. Even today my energy remains just as Even today my energy remains just as Even today my energy remains just as strong. Me as an engineer, as a person strong. Me as an engineer, as a person strong. Me as an engineer, as a person who loves mathematics, I have to ask who loves mathematics, I have to ask who loves mathematics, I have to ask Savvasa Raman is an Indian mathematician Savvasa Raman is an Indian mathematician Savvasa Raman is an Indian mathematician from a century ago. He's widely from a century ago. He's widely from a century ago. He's widely considered to be uh one of the greatest considered to be uh one of the greatest considered to be uh one of the greatest mathematicians of all time. Self-taught, mathematicians of all time. Self-taught, mathematicians of all time. Self-taught, grew up in poverty. You have often grew up in poverty. You have often grew up in poverty. You have often spoken about him. Uh what do you find spoken about him. Uh what do you find spoken about him. Uh what do you find inspiring about him? inspiring about him? inspiring about him? Look, Look, Look, I deeply respect him. I deeply respect him. I deeply respect him. and and and everyone in my country respects him as everyone in my country respects him as everyone in my country respects him as well because I strongly believe there's well because I strongly believe there's well because I strongly believe there's a deep connection between science and a deep connection between science and a deep connection between science and spirituality. If you closely observe spirituality. If you closely observe spirituality. If you closely observe many scientifically advanced many scientifically advanced many scientifically advanced minds, you'll find they're open minds, you'll find they're open minds, you'll find they're open spiritually advanced too. They're not spiritually advanced too. They're not spiritually advanced too. They're not disconnected from spirituality. disconnected from spirituality. disconnected from spirituality. Sinasa Rammanujan once said Sinasa Rammanujan once said Sinasa Rammanujan once said that his mathematical that his mathematical that his mathematical ideas came from the goddess he ideas came from the goddess he ideas came from the goddess he woripped. Meaning ideas emerge from woripped. Meaning ideas emerge from woripped. Meaning ideas emerge from spiritual spiritual spiritual discipline. And discipline is more than discipline. And discipline is more than discipline. And discipline is more than just hard work. just hard work. just hard work. It means fully devoting yourself to a It means fully devoting yourself to a It means fully devoting yourself to a task and completely task and completely task and completely immersing yourself into immersing yourself into immersing yourself into it so much that you become one with your work. You see, the more open we are to work. You see, the more open we are to work. You see, the more open we are to new and different sources of knowledge, new and different sources of knowledge, new and different sources of knowledge, the more new ideas we'll have. I think the more new ideas we'll have. I think the more new ideas we'll have. I think it's important for us to clearly it's important for us to clearly it's important for us to clearly understand the difference between understand the difference between understand the difference between information and knowledge. information and knowledge. information and knowledge. Some people mistakenly confuse Some people mistakenly confuse Some people mistakenly confuse information with knowledge, carrying information with knowledge, carrying information with knowledge, carrying around large amounts of information. But around large amounts of information. But around large amounts of information. But I don't believe information alone equals I don't believe information alone equals I don't believe information alone equals knowledge. Knowledge is something knowledge. Knowledge is something knowledge. Knowledge is something deeper. It gradually evolves through deeper. It gradually evolves through deeper. It gradually evolves through processing, reflection, and processing, reflection, and processing, reflection, and understanding. Recognizing this understanding. Recognizing this understanding. Recognizing this difference is important in how we handle difference is important in how we handle difference is important in how we handle both. You have a reputation for being a both. You have a reputation for being a both. You have a reputation for being a decisive leader. So can you walk me decisive leader. So can you walk me decisive leader. So can you walk me through on this topic of ideas, how you through on this topic of ideas, how you through on this topic of ideas, how you make decisions, what's your make decisions, what's your make decisions, what's your process? So for instance, when facing a process? So for instance, when facing a process? So for instance, when facing a high stakes choice high stakes choice high stakes choice uh with no clear precedence, you know, a uh with no clear precedence, you know, a uh with no clear precedence, you know, a lot of lot of lot of uncertainty, having to balance input, uncertainty, having to balance input, uncertainty, having to balance input, how do you make decisions? There are many factors to my decisions? There are many factors to my decisions? There are many factors to my decision making. decision making. decision making. First, I'm perhaps the only politician First, I'm perhaps the only politician First, I'm perhaps the only politician in in in India who has stayed India who has stayed India who has stayed overnight in around 85 to 90% of the overnight in around 85 to 90% of the overnight in around 85 to 90% of the districts across the country. This was before my current country. This was before my current country. This was before my current role. I used to travel extensively. I learned a lot from those extensively. I learned a lot from those extensively. I learned a lot from those experiences. experiences. experiences. They gave They gave They gave me firsthand knowledge of the ground me firsthand knowledge of the ground me firsthand knowledge of the ground realities and grassroots level realities and grassroots level realities and grassroots level issues, not something asked or heard or issues, not something asked or heard or issues, not something asked or heard or learned merely from learned merely from learned merely from books. Secondly, from a governance perspective, Secondly, from a governance perspective, Secondly, from a governance perspective, I carry no baggage of any kind. I carry no baggage of any kind. I carry no baggage of any kind. I don't carry any I don't carry any I don't carry any baggage that weighs me down or forces me baggage that weighs me down or forces me baggage that weighs me down or forces me to act a certain way. Thirdly, I have a to act a certain way. Thirdly, I have a to act a certain way. Thirdly, I have a simple yard stick for simple yard stick for simple yard stick for decisions. My country first. I always decisions. My country first. I always decisions. My country first. I always question if what I'm doing harms my question if what I'm doing harms my question if what I'm doing harms my nation in any way. nation in any way. nation in any way. Additionally, Mahatma Gandhi once said Additionally, Mahatma Gandhi once said Additionally, Mahatma Gandhi once said that if you're ever unsure when making a that if you're ever unsure when making a that if you're ever unsure when making a decision, think of the poorest person's decision, think of the poorest person's decision, think of the poorest person's face, remember them and ask yourself, face, remember them and ask yourself, face, remember them and ask yourself, will this help them? Then your decision will this help them? Then your decision will this help them? Then your decision will be right. That wisdom always guides will be right. That wisdom always guides will be right. That wisdom always guides me. Remembering ordinary citizens and me. Remembering ordinary citizens and me. Remembering ordinary citizens and considering how my actions affect them. considering how my actions affect them. considering how my actions affect them. Another factor in my approach is Another factor in my approach is Another factor in my approach is that I'm very well connected in my that I'm very well connected in my that I'm very well connected in my administration. My officials know this administration. My officials know this administration. My officials know this well and probably well and probably well and probably feel overwhelmed by it, by the fact that feel overwhelmed by it, by the fact that feel overwhelmed by it, by the fact that my information channels are numerous and my information channels are numerous and my information channels are numerous and are very are very are very active. Because of that, I receive lots active. Because of that, I receive lots active. Because of that, I receive lots of insights from various of insights from various of insights from various sources. So when someone comes to brief sources. So when someone comes to brief sources. So when someone comes to brief me, that's not my only source of me, that's not my only source of me, that's not my only source of information. I always have additional information. I always have additional information. I always have additional perspectives available to me. Another perspectives available to me. Another perspectives available to me. Another thing, I maintain a learner's mindset. thing, I maintain a learner's mindset. thing, I maintain a learner's mindset. Suppose I'm not familiar with something Suppose I'm not familiar with something Suppose I'm not familiar with something and an official explains it to me. I and an official explains it to me. I and an official explains it to me. I approach them like a student and ask can approach them like a student and ask can approach them like a student and ask can you clarify this how does it work then you clarify this how does it work then you clarify this how does it work then what happens next and how and whenever I what happens next and how and whenever I what happens next and how and whenever I have different information I have different information I have different information I deliberately played devil's advocate and deliberately played devil's advocate and deliberately played devil's advocate and ask challenging ask challenging ask challenging questions I thoroughly analyze the questions I thoroughly analyze the questions I thoroughly analyze the issue from multiple issue from multiple issue from multiple angles hoping that careful evaluation angles hoping that careful evaluation angles hoping that careful evaluation will yield something valuable Then once I converge toward a decision Then once I converge toward a decision Then once I converge toward a decision or action that is worth taking, I share or action that is worth taking, I share or action that is worth taking, I share the idea the idea the idea informally with like-minded informally with like-minded informally with like-minded people just to gauge their reactions and people just to gauge their reactions and people just to gauge their reactions and see how they see how they see how they respond, gathering insights and feedback respond, gathering insights and feedback respond, gathering insights and feedback before moving forward until finally I have a strong conviction that finally I have a strong conviction that finally I have a strong conviction that my decision is my decision is my decision is Right? This entire decision-m process Right? This entire decision-m process Right? This entire decision-m process doesn't actually take much time. My doesn't actually take much time. My doesn't actually take much time. My speed is very fast. Let me share an speed is very fast. Let me share an speed is very fast. Let me share an example. How did I make decisions during co I had Nobel Prize winners advising co I had Nobel Prize winners advising co I had Nobel Prize winners advising me, giving countless economic examples me, giving countless economic examples me, giving countless economic examples from around the world. They'd say, "This from around the world. They'd say, "This from around the world. They'd say, "This country is doing this, that country did country is doing this, that country did country is doing this, that country did that. You should do it, too." Renowned that. You should do it, too." Renowned that. You should do it, too." Renowned economists constantly bombarded me with economists constantly bombarded me with economists constantly bombarded me with suggestions. Political parties pressured suggestions. Political parties pressured suggestions. Political parties pressured me relentlessly, urging me to spend huge me relentlessly, urging me to spend huge me relentlessly, urging me to spend huge amounts of money. But I didn't act amounts of money. But I didn't act amounts of money. But I didn't act immediately. I paused and immediately. I paused and immediately. I paused and reflected. What exactly should I do? reflected. What exactly should I do? reflected. What exactly should I do? Then considering the unique conditions Then considering the unique conditions Then considering the unique conditions of my own country, I made a clear of my own country, I made a clear of my own country, I made a clear decision. I wouldn't let the poor sleep decision. I wouldn't let the poor sleep decision. I wouldn't let the poor sleep hungry. I wouldn't allow social tensions to I wouldn't allow social tensions to I wouldn't allow social tensions to arise over basic daily needs. These core arise over basic daily needs. These core arise over basic daily needs. These core principles guided my principles guided my principles guided my approach. The entire world was in approach. The entire world was in approach. The entire world was in lockdown. Global economies were lockdown. Global economies were lockdown. Global economies were collapsing. Everyone pressured me to collapsing. Everyone pressured me to collapsing. Everyone pressured me to empty the treasury, print more currency, empty the treasury, print more currency, empty the treasury, print more currency, and flood money everywhere. But I and flood money everywhere. But I and flood money everywhere. But I decided that this was not the right decided that this was not the right decided that this was not the right economic route to follow. economic route to follow. economic route to follow. And so instead, the path I And so instead, the path I And so instead, the path I chose after carefully listening to chose after carefully listening to chose after carefully listening to experts, understanding their opinions experts, understanding their opinions experts, understanding their opinions without opposing without opposing without opposing them, them, them, and combining their advice with my own and combining their advice with my own and combining their advice with my own country's situation and my personal country's situation and my personal country's situation and my personal experiences created a system that worked experiences created a system that worked experiences created a system that worked effectively. As a effectively. As a effectively. As a result when the whole world suffered result when the whole world suffered result when the whole world suffered from severe inflation immediately after from severe inflation immediately after from severe inflation immediately after CO India did CO India did CO India did not. not. not. Today my country is steadily advancing Today my country is steadily advancing Today my country is steadily advancing at a rapid pace emerging as one of the at a rapid pace emerging as one of the at a rapid pace emerging as one of the fastest growing major economies in the fastest growing major economies in the fastest growing major economies in the world. The main reason is that during world. The main reason is that during world. The main reason is that during that crisis with patience and that crisis with patience and that crisis with patience and discipline, I resisted the temptation to discipline, I resisted the temptation to discipline, I resisted the temptation to apply every global theory apply every global theory apply every global theory blindly. We didn't worry about what blindly. We didn't worry about what blindly. We didn't worry about what newspapers would say, whether they'd newspapers would say, whether they'd newspapers would say, whether they'd praise or criticize, ignoring all that. praise or criticize, ignoring all that. praise or criticize, ignoring all that. I stayed focused on basic fundamentals, I stayed focused on basic fundamentals, I stayed focused on basic fundamentals, and by doing so, we succeeded and kept and by doing so, we succeeded and kept and by doing so, we succeeded and kept moving ahead. So ultimately, my economy moving ahead. So ultimately, my economy moving ahead. So ultimately, my economy benefited as well. My approach has benefited as well. My approach has benefited as well. My approach has always been to stay focused on these always been to stay focused on these always been to stay focused on these fundamentals. Another strength is my fundamentals. Another strength is my fundamentals. Another strength is my risk-taking risk-taking risk-taking capacity. I don't worry about potential capacity. I don't worry about potential capacity. I don't worry about potential losses for losses for losses for myself. If something is right for my myself. If something is right for my myself. If something is right for my country, for the people, I'm always country, for the people, I'm always country, for the people, I'm always prepared to take the risk. And secondly, prepared to take the risk. And secondly, prepared to take the risk. And secondly, I take ownership of my decisions. If I take ownership of my decisions. If I take ownership of my decisions. If something goes wrong, I don't ship blame something goes wrong, I don't ship blame something goes wrong, I don't ship blame to others. to others. to others. I stand up, take I stand up, take I stand up, take responsibility and own the responsibility and own the responsibility and own the outcome. When you take outcome. When you take outcome. When you take ownership, your team also becomes deeply ownership, your team also becomes deeply ownership, your team also becomes deeply committed. They know this person won't committed. They know this person won't committed. They know this person won't let us down, won't abandon us. He'll let us down, won't abandon us. He'll let us down, won't abandon us. He'll always stand with us because they see always stand with us because they see always stand with us because they see I'm making honest decisions, not for I'm making honest decisions, not for I'm making honest decisions, not for myself, but for the nation. I've openly myself, but for the nation. I've openly myself, but for the nation. I've openly told the country from the start, I'm told the country from the start, I'm told the country from the start, I'm human. I can make mistakes, but I won't human. I can make mistakes, but I won't human. I can make mistakes, but I won't act with bad act with bad act with bad intentions. People remember those words intentions. People remember those words intentions. People remember those words clearly. Even if something doesn't go as clearly. Even if something doesn't go as clearly. Even if something doesn't go as planned, they trust that Modi's planned, they trust that Modi's planned, they trust that Modi's intentions were right. They think he intentions were right. They think he intentions were right. They think he probably meant to do something good, probably meant to do something good, probably meant to do something good, even if it didn't work out. So, society even if it didn't work out. So, society even if it didn't work out. So, society sees and accepts me just as I am. You sees and accepts me just as I am. You sees and accepts me just as I am. You gave a powerful speech on AI a few weeks gave a powerful speech on AI a few weeks gave a powerful speech on AI a few weeks ago at the uh AI summit in France. In it ago at the uh AI summit in France. In it ago at the uh AI summit in France. In it you spoke about the talent pool for AI you spoke about the talent pool for AI you spoke about the talent pool for AI engineers in India. I think it's engineers in India. I think it's engineers in India. I think it's probably one of the biggest pools of probably one of the biggest pools of probably one of the biggest pools of brilliant engineers in the world. So how brilliant engineers in the world. So how brilliant engineers in the world. So how can uh India become the leader in the can uh India become the leader in the can uh India become the leader in the space of AI currently lags behind the space of AI currently lags behind the space of AI currently lags behind the United States? What does it take for United States? What does it take for United States? What does it take for India to start winning and leading the India to start winning and leading the India to start winning and leading the world in AI? world in AI? world in AI? One thing I'm about to say might sound One thing I'm about to say might sound One thing I'm about to say might sound strong and it may even upset some strong and it may even upset some strong and it may even upset some people, but since you've asked, I'll people, but since you've asked, I'll people, but since you've asked, I'll speak openly from my speak openly from my speak openly from my heart. No matter what the world does heart. No matter what the world does heart. No matter what the world does with with with AI, it will remain incomplete without AI, it will remain incomplete without AI, it will remain incomplete without India. I'm making this statement very India. I'm making this statement very India. I'm making this statement very responsibly. Tell me, you've heard my speech at the AI me, you've heard my speech at the AI me, you've heard my speech at the AI summit in summit in summit in Paris on global Paris on global Paris on global cooperation. What do you cooperation. What do you cooperation. What do you think? Can anyone develop AI entirely on think? Can anyone develop AI entirely on think? Can anyone develop AI entirely on their own? What is your perspective on their own? What is your perspective on their own? What is your perspective on this? So you you gave uh actually in this? So you you gave uh actually in this? So you you gave uh actually in your speech a brilliant example of your speech a brilliant example of your speech a brilliant example of the positive impact of the positive impact of the positive impact of AI and the limitations of AI. I think AI and the limitations of AI. I think AI and the limitations of AI. I think the example you gave is uh when you ask the example you gave is uh when you ask the example you gave is uh when you ask it to generate an image of a person it to generate an image of a person it to generate an image of a person writing with their left hand left hand writing with their left hand left hand writing with their left hand left hand it's always going to generate a person it's always going to generate a person it's always going to generate a person writing with their right hand. So in writing with their right hand. So in writing with their right hand. So in that way the west creating an AI system that way the west creating an AI system that way the west creating an AI system where India is not part of that process where India is not part of that process where India is not part of that process is always going to generate the person is always going to generate the person is always going to generate the person with the right hand is is an essential with the right hand is is an essential with the right hand is is an essential part of what the world is historically part of what the world is historically part of what the world is historically but especially in the 21st century. I but especially in the 21st century. I but especially in the 21st century. I agree. I believe AI development is agree. I believe AI development is agree. I believe AI development is fundamentally a collaboration. fundamentally a collaboration. fundamentally a collaboration. Everyone Everyone Everyone involved supports one involved supports one involved supports one another through shared another through shared another through shared experiences and experiences and experiences and learning. India isn't just developing learning. India isn't just developing learning. India isn't just developing theoretical AI theoretical AI theoretical AI models. It is actively working on and models. It is actively working on and models. It is actively working on and bringing to bringing to bringing to life AIdriven applications for very life AIdriven applications for very life AIdriven applications for very specific use specific use specific use cases to ensure that GPU access is cases to ensure that GPU access is cases to ensure that GPU access is available to every section of society. available to every section of society. available to every section of society. We have already created a unique We have already created a unique We have already created a unique marketplace-based model to ensure its marketplace-based model to ensure its marketplace-based model to ensure its broad broad broad accessibility. A significant mindset accessibility. A significant mindset accessibility. A significant mindset shift is taking place in shift is taking place in shift is taking place in India. Though historical India. Though historical India. Though historical influences, traditional government influences, traditional government influences, traditional government procedures or the lack of strong support procedures or the lack of strong support procedures or the lack of strong support infrastructure made us appear as lagging behind to others. Take 5G for example. The world initially Take 5G for example. The world initially Take 5G for example. The world initially believed we were far believed we were far believed we were far behind. But once we behind. But once we behind. But once we started, started, started, we became the fastest nation globally to we became the fastest nation globally to we became the fastest nation globally to roll out comprehensive 5G networks. roll out comprehensive 5G networks. roll out comprehensive 5G networks. Recently, an American company executive Recently, an American company executive Recently, an American company executive visited me and shared his experiences visited me and shared his experiences visited me and shared his experiences about this very fact. He told me that if about this very fact. He told me that if about this very fact. He told me that if I were to advertise in the US for I were to advertise in the US for I were to advertise in the US for engineers, I would only receive enough engineers, I would only receive enough engineers, I would only receive enough applicants to fill a single room at applicants to fill a single room at applicants to fill a single room at best. But if I do the same in India, best. But if I do the same in India, best. But if I do the same in India, even a football field wouldn't be enough even a football field wouldn't be enough even a football field wouldn't be enough to hold to hold to hold them. This indicates that India has them. This indicates that India has them. This indicates that India has access to an extraordinarily vast pool access to an extraordinarily vast pool access to an extraordinarily vast pool of talent and that's our greatest of talent and that's our greatest of talent and that's our greatest strength. strength. strength. After After After all, artificial all, artificial all, artificial intelligence is intelligence is intelligence is fundamentally powered, shaped, and fundamentally powered, shaped, and fundamentally powered, shaped, and guided by human guided by human guided by human intelligence. Without genuine human intelligence. Without genuine human intelligence. Without genuine human intelligence, AI can't thrive or intelligence, AI can't thrive or intelligence, AI can't thrive or progress sustainably. And that real progress sustainably. And that real progress sustainably. And that real intelligence exists abundantly in intelligence exists abundantly in intelligence exists abundantly in India's youth and talent India's youth and talent India's youth and talent pool. And I believe that's our greatest pool. And I believe that's our greatest pool. And I believe that's our greatest asset. asset. asset. But also if you look many of the top But also if you look many of the top But also if you look many of the top tech leaders first of all tech talent tech leaders first of all tech talent tech leaders first of all tech talent but tech leaders in the US are of Indian but tech leaders in the US are of Indian but tech leaders in the US are of Indian origin. Sundar Pachai Sacha Nadella origin. Sundar Pachai Sacha Nadella origin. Sundar Pachai Sacha Nadella Arvan Servinas you've met with some of Arvan Servinas you've met with some of Arvan Servinas you've met with some of them. Uh them. Uh them. Uh what spirit of their Indian origins do what spirit of their Indian origins do what spirit of their Indian origins do you think they carry in them that you think they carry in them that you think they carry in them that enables them to be so successful? enables them to be so successful? enables them to be so successful? Look, Indian culture emphasizes Look, Indian culture emphasizes Look, Indian culture emphasizes that there should be equal respect for that there should be equal respect for that there should be equal respect for the place where you're the place where you're the place where you're born and the place where you born and the place where you born and the place where you work. There should be no work. There should be no work. There should be no difference. As much as there is difference. As much as there is difference. As much as there is dedication to the land of birth, there dedication to the land of birth, there dedication to the land of birth, there should be the same sense of dedication should be the same sense of dedication should be the same sense of dedication to the land of work. You should always to the land of work. You should always to the land of work. You should always give your best wherever you are. Because give your best wherever you are. Because give your best wherever you are. Because of these rich cultural values, every of these rich cultural values, every of these rich cultural values, every Indian strives to give their best effort Indian strives to give their best effort Indian strives to give their best effort regardless of their role or position. regardless of their role or position. regardless of their role or position. They don't wait until they're in senior They don't wait until they're in senior They don't wait until they're in senior roles, even in smaller roles. Secondly, roles, even in smaller roles. Secondly, roles, even in smaller roles. Secondly, they never get involved in anything they never get involved in anything they never get involved in anything questionable or unethical. They tend to questionable or unethical. They tend to questionable or unethical. They tend to remain dedicated to what's right and remain dedicated to what's right and remain dedicated to what's right and ethical. Their nature is collaborative. ethical. Their nature is collaborative. ethical. Their nature is collaborative. They easily get along with others, They easily get along with others, They easily get along with others, eventually for eventually for eventually for success. Just having knowledge isn't success. Just having knowledge isn't success. Just having knowledge isn't enough. The ability to work effectively enough. The ability to work effectively enough. The ability to work effectively as part of a team matters significantly as part of a team matters significantly as part of a team matters significantly more. Understanding people and more. Understanding people and more. Understanding people and harnessing their abilities is an harnessing their abilities is an harnessing their abilities is an incredibly valuable incredibly valuable incredibly valuable skill. skill. skill. Generally, people raised in India, Generally, people raised in India, Generally, people raised in India, especially those coming from joint especially those coming from joint especially those coming from joint families and brought up in an open families and brought up in an open families and brought up in an open society find it easier to lead complex society find it easier to lead complex society find it easier to lead complex tasks and large teams effectively. tasks and large teams effectively. tasks and large teams effectively. That's why That's why That's why today in major corporations across the today in major corporations across the today in major corporations across the globe you'll find Indians holding key globe you'll find Indians holding key globe you'll find Indians holding key leadership positions and the problem leadership positions and the problem leadership positions and the problem solving abilities along with the solving abilities along with the solving abilities along with the analytical thinking of Indian analytical thinking of Indian analytical thinking of Indian professionals are truly professionals are truly professionals are truly exceptional. I believe this capability exceptional. I believe this capability exceptional. I believe this capability is so strong it makes Indians globally is so strong it makes Indians globally is so strong it makes Indians globally competitive and competitive and competitive and extremely valuable on the international extremely valuable on the international extremely valuable on the international stage. This is the reason stage. This is the reason stage. This is the reason why in fields like innovation, why in fields like innovation, why in fields like innovation, entrepreneurship, startups and entrepreneurship, startups and entrepreneurship, startups and boardrooms, you'll find Indians boardrooms, you'll find Indians boardrooms, you'll find Indians achieving extraordinary results achieving extraordinary results achieving extraordinary results everywhere. Take our space sector for everywhere. Take our space sector for everywhere. Take our space sector for example. Previously, it was entirely government Previously, it was entirely government Previously, it was entirely government controlled, but just a couple of years controlled, but just a couple of years controlled, but just a couple of years ago, I opened it up to the private ago, I opened it up to the private ago, I opened it up to the private sector and now we already have 200 sector and now we already have 200 sector and now we already have 200 startups working in space startups working in space startups working in space technology. technology. technology. Moreover, our missions like Moreover, our missions like Moreover, our missions like Chandrean are extremely cost Chandrean are extremely cost Chandrean are extremely cost effective. India's Chundrean mission effective. India's Chundrean mission effective. India's Chundrean mission cost less than what Hollywood spends cost less than what Hollywood spends cost less than what Hollywood spends making a single blockbuster film. making a single blockbuster film. making a single blockbuster film. So when the world sees how cost So when the world sees how cost So when the world sees how cost effective our work is, they naturally effective our work is, they naturally effective our work is, they naturally think why not partner with India. This think why not partner with India. This think why not partner with India. This automatically generates respect for automatically generates respect for automatically generates respect for Indian talent Indian talent Indian talent globally. I globally. I globally. I believe this is a hallmark of our believe this is a hallmark of our believe this is a hallmark of our civilizational civilizational civilizational ethos. So you spoke about this human ethos. So you spoke about this human ethos. So you spoke about this human intelligence. Uh do you worry that AI intelligence. Uh do you worry that AI intelligence. Uh do you worry that AI artificial intelligence will replace us artificial intelligence will replace us artificial intelligence will replace us humans? humans? humans? It's true that in every era a competitive atmosphere was created between technology and created between technology and created between technology and humanity. At humanity. At humanity. At times it was times it was times it was even portrayed as even portrayed as even portrayed as conflict. It was often portrayed as if conflict. It was often portrayed as if conflict. It was often portrayed as if technology would challenge human technology would challenge human technology would challenge human existence itself. But every time as existence itself. But every time as existence itself. But every time as technology advanced, humans adapted and technology advanced, humans adapted and technology advanced, humans adapted and stayed a step ahead. It has always been stayed a step ahead. It has always been stayed a step ahead. It has always been the case. After all, it is humans who the case. After all, it is humans who the case. After all, it is humans who find the best ways to use technology to find the best ways to use technology to find the best ways to use technology to their their their advantage. And I believe that with advantage. And I believe that with advantage. And I believe that with AI, humans are AI, humans are AI, humans are now being forced to reflect on what it now being forced to reflect on what it now being forced to reflect on what it truly means to be human. This is the truly means to be human. This is the truly means to be human. This is the real power of real power of real power of AI. Because of the way AI functions, it AI. Because of the way AI functions, it AI. Because of the way AI functions, it has challenged how we perceive work has challenged how we perceive work has challenged how we perceive work itself. itself. itself. But human imagination is the fuel. AI can fuel. AI can fuel. AI can create many things based on that and in create many things based on that and in create many things based on that and in the future it may achieve even more. the future it may achieve even more. the future it may achieve even more. Still, I firmly believe that no Still, I firmly believe that no Still, I firmly believe that no technology can technology can technology can ever replace the boundless creativity ever replace the boundless creativity ever replace the boundless creativity and imagination of the human mind. I and imagination of the human mind. I and imagination of the human mind. I agree with you. It does make me and a agree with you. It does make me and a agree with you. It does make me and a lot of people wonder what it makes lot of people wonder what it makes lot of people wonder what it makes humans special because it seems that humans special because it seems that humans special because it seems that there's a lot that makes humans special. there's a lot that makes humans special. there's a lot that makes humans special. the imagination, the creativity, the the imagination, the creativity, the the imagination, the creativity, the consciousness, the ability to be afraid, consciousness, the ability to be afraid, consciousness, the ability to be afraid, to to to love, to dream, to think outside of the love, to dream, to think outside of the love, to dream, to think outside of the box, outside of the box of the box of box, outside of the box of the box of box, outside of the box of the box of the box, take risks, all of those the box, take risks, all of those the box, take risks, all of those things. Now, look, humans have an innate things. Now, look, humans have an innate things. Now, look, humans have an innate ability to care for each ability to care for each ability to care for each other, the natural tendency to be other, the natural tendency to be other, the natural tendency to be concerned about one another. concerned about one another. concerned about one another. Now can someone tell me is AI capable of Now can someone tell me is AI capable of Now can someone tell me is AI capable of this? This is one of the big open this? This is one of the big open this? This is one of the big open questions of the 21st questions of the 21st questions of the 21st century. Every year you host the parica century. Every year you host the parica century. Every year you host the parica bchacha where you interact directly with bchacha where you interact directly with bchacha where you interact directly with young students and give them advice on young students and give them advice on young students and give them advice on how to prepare for exams. I watched a how to prepare for exams. I watched a how to prepare for exams. I watched a bunch of them. So you you give advice on bunch of them. So you you give advice on bunch of them. So you you give advice on how to succeed in exams, how to manage how to succeed in exams, how to manage how to succeed in exams, how to manage stress, all those kinds of things. Uh stress, all those kinds of things. Uh stress, all those kinds of things. Uh can you explain at a high level the can you explain at a high level the can you explain at a high level the different exams that students in India different exams that students in India different exams that students in India need to take in their education journey need to take in their education journey need to take in their education journey and why it's so stressful? By and large and why it's so stressful? By and large and why it's so stressful? By and large a strange mindset has developed in a strange mindset has developed in a strange mindset has developed in society society society today. Even schools measure their today. Even schools measure their today. Even schools measure their success by students rankings. success by students rankings. success by students rankings. Families too feel pride when their child Families too feel pride when their child Families too feel pride when their child achieves a high rank because they achieves a high rank because they achieves a high rank because they believe it improves their educational believe it improves their educational believe it improves their educational and social status. This mentality has and social status. This mentality has and social status. This mentality has resulted in increased pressure on resulted in increased pressure on resulted in increased pressure on children. Kids also began feeling that children. Kids also began feeling that children. Kids also began feeling that their entire lives depend on 10th and their entire lives depend on 10th and their entire lives depend on 10th and 12th grade 12th grade 12th grade exams. We've introduced significant exams. We've introduced significant exams. We've introduced significant changes in our new education policy to changes in our new education policy to changes in our new education policy to address this issue. But until those address this issue. But until those address this issue. But until those changes take effect on the ground, I changes take effect on the ground, I changes take effect on the ground, I feel another responsibility. If our children face responsibility. If our children face responsibility. If our children face challenges, it's my duty to listen to challenges, it's my duty to listen to challenges, it's my duty to listen to them, understand them and ease their them, understand them and ease their them, understand them and ease their burden. In a way when I conduct parika burden. In a way when I conduct parika burden. In a way when I conduct parika chacha I get insights directly from the chacha I get insights directly from the chacha I get insights directly from the students understand their parents' students understand their parents' students understand their parents' mindset as well as the perspectives of mindset as well as the perspectives of mindset as well as the perspectives of people in the educational people in the educational people in the educational field. So these discussions don't just field. So these discussions don't just field. So these discussions don't just benefit the students they benefit me benefit the students they benefit me benefit the students they benefit me too. Exams are valuable for assessing too. Exams are valuable for assessing too. Exams are valuable for assessing knowledge in knowledge in knowledge in a specific domain. a specific domain. a specific domain. But they can't become the sole measure But they can't become the sole measure But they can't become the sole measure of someone's overall of someone's overall of someone's overall potential. Many potential. Many potential. Many people may not score high academically people may not score high academically people may not score high academically yet can hit a century in cricket because yet can hit a century in cricket because yet can hit a century in cricket because that's where their true strength lies. that's where their true strength lies. that's where their true strength lies. When the focus shifts to actual When the focus shifts to actual When the focus shifts to actual learning, scores tend to naturally learning, scores tend to naturally learning, scores tend to naturally improve. improve. improve. I remember when I was a I remember when I was a I remember when I was a student, I had a student, I had a student, I had a teacher whose learning techniques still teacher whose learning techniques still teacher whose learning techniques still greatly appeal to me today. He would greatly appeal to me today. He would greatly appeal to me today. He would give us children specific instructions. give us children specific instructions. give us children specific instructions. To one child, he would say, "Tomorrow, To one child, he would say, "Tomorrow, To one child, he would say, "Tomorrow, bring exactly 10 chickpeas from bring exactly 10 chickpeas from bring exactly 10 chickpeas from home." To another, he might request, home." To another, he might request, home." To another, he might request, "Bring 15 grains of rice, no more, no "Bring 15 grains of rice, no more, no "Bring 15 grains of rice, no more, no less." A third child could be told, less." A third child could be told, less." A third child could be told, "Bring 21 moon beans, precisely that "Bring 21 moon beans, precisely that "Bring 21 moon beans, precisely that number." Different students got number." Different students got number." Different students got different quantities and varieties. So different quantities and varieties. So different quantities and varieties. So each child would think, "I need to get each child would think, "I need to get each child would think, "I need to get exactly 10." And counting them at home exactly 10." And counting them at home exactly 10." And counting them at home help them memorize numbers naturally. help them memorize numbers naturally. help them memorize numbers naturally. Then they'd learn what chickpeas were. Then they'd learn what chickpeas were. Then they'd learn what chickpeas were. And after returning to school, they'd And after returning to school, they'd And after returning to school, they'd pull it all. The teacher would then ask, pull it all. The teacher would then ask, pull it all. The teacher would then ask, "Take out 10 chickpeas, three chickpeas, "Take out 10 chickpeas, three chickpeas, "Take out 10 chickpeas, three chickpeas, two moon beans." This way, children two moon beans." This way, children two moon beans." This way, children learned math and could identify learned math and could identify learned math and could identify chickpeas and moon beans effortlessly. chickpeas and moon beans effortlessly. chickpeas and moon beans effortlessly. I'm talking about early childhood I'm talking about early childhood I'm talking about early childhood education here. Such learning techniques education here. Such learning techniques education here. Such learning techniques educate children without burdening them. educate children without burdening them. educate children without burdening them. And we've incorporated similar methods And we've incorporated similar methods And we've incorporated similar methods into our new education policy. When I into our new education policy. When I into our new education policy. When I was in school, I observed one of my was in school, I observed one of my was in school, I observed one of my teachers using an innovative idea. On teachers using an innovative idea. On teachers using an innovative idea. On his very first day, he placed a diary on his very first day, he placed a diary on his very first day, he placed a diary on the table and the table and the table and said, "Whoever arrives earliest each said, "Whoever arrives earliest each said, "Whoever arrives earliest each morning will write one sentence in this morning will write one sentence in this morning will write one sentence in this diary along with their name." diary along with their name." diary along with their name." The next The next The next student would then need to write a student would then need to write a student would then need to write a related related related sentence. At first, I'd rush to school sentence. At first, I'd rush to school sentence. At first, I'd rush to school very early every day. Why? So that I very early every day. Why? So that I very early every day. Why? So that I could write the first sentence. I once could write the first sentence. I once could write the first sentence. I once wrote something like, "Today's wrote something like, "Today's wrote something like, "Today's sunrise was sunrise was sunrise was magnificent. It filled me with energy. magnificent. It filled me with energy. magnificent. It filled me with energy. I'd write my name and whoever arrived I'd write my name and whoever arrived I'd write my name and whoever arrived after me had to write something after me had to write something after me had to write something connected to the sunrise as connected to the sunrise as connected to the sunrise as well. After a few well. After a few well. After a few days, I days, I days, I realized my creativity wasn't improving realized my creativity wasn't improving realized my creativity wasn't improving much from this. Why? Because I'd arrived much from this. Why? Because I'd arrived much from this. Why? Because I'd arrived with the fixed thought already in mind with the fixed thought already in mind with the fixed thought already in mind and simply write it down. So, I decided and simply write it down. So, I decided and simply write it down. So, I decided I'd start going last instead. I'd start going last instead. I'd start going last instead. What happened then was that I read what What happened then was that I read what What happened then was that I read what others had written others had written others had written first and then tried to give my very first and then tried to give my very first and then tried to give my very best. As a result, my creativity began best. As a result, my creativity began best. As a result, my creativity began to improve even to improve even to improve even more. Sometimes teachers do these small more. Sometimes teachers do these small more. Sometimes teachers do these small simple activities that greatly impact simple activities that greatly impact simple activities that greatly impact your life. your life. your life. These These These experiences combined with my own experiences combined with my own experiences combined with my own background in organizational work made background in organizational work made background in organizational work made human resource development a key area of human resource development a key area of human resource development a key area of focus for me. That's why I engage with focus for me. That's why I engage with focus for me. That's why I engage with children through events once or twice children through events once or twice children through events once or twice each year and over time these efforts each year and over time these efforts each year and over time these efforts have resulted in a book that's have resulted in a book that's have resulted in a book that's benefiting thousands of children serving benefiting thousands of children serving benefiting thousands of children serving as a valuable reference for them. Can as a valuable reference for them. Can as a valuable reference for them. Can you speak a little bit more you speak a little bit more you speak a little bit more uh by way of advice to students of uh uh by way of advice to students of uh uh by way of advice to students of uh how to be successful on their path in how to be successful on their path in how to be successful on their path in their career, how to find the career and their career, how to find the career and their career, how to find the career and how to find success in India and just to how to find success in India and just to how to find success in India and just to all the people across the world who find all the people across the world who find all the people across the world who find inspiration in your inspiration in your inspiration in your words. I believe words. I believe words. I believe that whatever task you get, if you perform that get, if you perform that get, if you perform that task with complete dedication and task with complete dedication and task with complete dedication and sincerity, they inevitably become an expert sooner or inevitably become an expert sooner or inevitably become an expert sooner or later. and their enhanced capabilities open doors to capabilities open doors to capabilities open doors to success while success while success while working. One must continually strive to working. One must continually strive to working. One must continually strive to improve their improve their improve their skills and should never skills and should never skills and should never underestimate their ability to learn. underestimate their ability to learn. underestimate their ability to learn. When someone constantly neglects their When someone constantly neglects their When someone constantly neglects their learning ability, they limit their learning ability, they limit their learning ability, they limit their growth. But those who look beyond their growth. But those who look beyond their growth. But those who look beyond their tasks and observe what others around tasks and observe what others around tasks and observe what others around them are doing. Their capacity can them are doing. Their capacity can them are doing. Their capacity can double or even triple to young people. double or even triple to young people. double or even triple to young people. I'd say this I'd say this I'd say this clearly. There's no need to feel clearly. There's no need to feel clearly. There's no need to feel discouraged. There's discouraged. There's discouraged. There's certainly some task out there destined certainly some task out there destined certainly some task out there destined just for you. Don't worry. just for you. Don't worry. just for you. Don't worry. Focus on enhancing your skills and Focus on enhancing your skills and Focus on enhancing your skills and opportunities will opportunities will opportunities will come. You may think I wanted to be a come. You may think I wanted to be a come. You may think I wanted to be a doctor but became a teacher. My life is doctor but became a teacher. My life is doctor but became a teacher. My life is wasted. Thinking like that won't help wasted. Thinking like that won't help wasted. Thinking like that won't help you at all. All right, you didn't become you at all. All right, you didn't become you at all. All right, you didn't become a doctor. But as a teacher, you can a doctor. But as a teacher, you can a doctor. But as a teacher, you can shape a 100 shape a 100 shape a 100 doctors. If you had become a doctor, doctors. If you had become a doctor, doctors. If you had become a doctor, you'd serve only your patients. But now you'd serve only your patients. But now you'd serve only your patients. But now as a teacher, you can inspire students as a teacher, you can inspire students as a teacher, you can inspire students to fulfill their dreams of becoming to fulfill their dreams of becoming to fulfill their dreams of becoming doctors. so that both you and your doctors. so that both you and your doctors. so that both you and your students can together serve millions of students can together serve millions of students can together serve millions of patients. Then he gains a new patients. Then he gains a new patients. Then he gains a new perspective on life. I couldn't become a perspective on life. I couldn't become a perspective on life. I couldn't become a doctor so I was miserable and I was doctor so I was miserable and I was doctor so I was miserable and I was unhappy being a teacher. But now I unhappy being a teacher. But now I unhappy being a teacher. But now I realize as a teacher I can create realize as a teacher I can create realize as a teacher I can create doctors. Connecting your life to a doctors. Connecting your life to a doctors. Connecting your life to a greater purpose brings a sense of greater purpose brings a sense of greater purpose brings a sense of inspiration and meaning. I have always inspiration and meaning. I have always inspiration and meaning. I have always believed believed believed that God has given everyone unique that God has given everyone unique that God has given everyone unique capabilities. Never lose faith in your own Never lose faith in your own Never lose faith in your own abilities. You should always maintain abilities. You should always maintain abilities. You should always maintain trust in your own abilities. Keep trust in your own abilities. Keep trust in your own abilities. Keep believing in yourself and trust that believing in yourself and trust that believing in yourself and trust that when the opportunity comes, you'll when the opportunity comes, you'll when the opportunity comes, you'll perform and you'll succeed. That perform and you'll succeed. That perform and you'll succeed. That confidence makes a person deliver confidence makes a person deliver confidence makes a person deliver results. How do those results. How do those results. How do those students deal with stress, with students deal with stress, with students deal with stress, with struggle, with difficulties along that struggle, with difficulties along that struggle, with difficulties along that path? path? path? Parents must first understand that life Parents must first understand that life Parents must first understand that life is not just about taking is not just about taking is not just about taking exams. Families should understand that exams. Families should understand that exams. Families should understand that their children aren't trophies meant to their children aren't trophies meant to their children aren't trophies meant to be be be displayed or models to show up in displayed or models to show up in displayed or models to show up in society. It's not about saying, "Look, society. It's not about saying, "Look, society. It's not about saying, "Look, my kids score so high." Parents really my kids score so high." Parents really my kids score so high." Parents really need to stop using their kids just as need to stop using their kids just as need to stop using their kids just as status symbols. Secondly, students status symbols. Secondly, students status symbols. Secondly, students should always keep should always keep should always keep themselves well prepared beforehand. themselves well prepared beforehand. themselves well prepared beforehand. Only Only Only then can they appear for exams feeling then can they appear for exams feeling then can they appear for exams feeling stress free and confident. They should stress free and confident. They should stress free and confident. They should have complete trust in themselves and have complete trust in themselves and have complete trust in themselves and their their their abilities. Sometimes I see students abilities. Sometimes I see students abilities. Sometimes I see students panic over the smallest issues during panic over the smallest issues during panic over the smallest issues during exams. They take papers or other things exams. They take papers or other things exams. They take papers or other things and when their pen suddenly stops and when their pen suddenly stops and when their pen suddenly stops working causing anxiety. Sometimes they working causing anxiety. Sometimes they working causing anxiety. Sometimes they feel uneasy thinking oh no I don't like feel uneasy thinking oh no I don't like feel uneasy thinking oh no I don't like sitting next to this person. If the sitting next to this person. If the sitting next to this person. If the bench wobbles their whole attention goes bench wobbles their whole attention goes bench wobbles their whole attention goes there. indicating there. indicating there. indicating self-doubt. Those lacking confidence self-doubt. Those lacking confidence self-doubt. Those lacking confidence constantly keep looking for constantly keep looking for constantly keep looking for distractions. But if you're confident distractions. But if you're confident distractions. But if you're confident and have genuinely worked hard, just and have genuinely worked hard, just and have genuinely worked hard, just take a minute, take some deep breaths, take a minute, take some deep breaths, take a minute, take some deep breaths, relax your mind, and refocus your relax your mind, and refocus your relax your mind, and refocus your attention attention attention calmly. Slowly read through the calmly. Slowly read through the calmly. Slowly read through the questions and allocate your time questions and allocate your time questions and allocate your time systematically. I have this amount of systematically. I have this amount of systematically. I have this amount of time. I'll dedicate these minutes per time. I'll dedicate these minutes per time. I'll dedicate these minutes per question. question. question. In my experience, students who regularly In my experience, students who regularly In my experience, students who regularly practice writing test papers can easily practice writing test papers can easily practice writing test papers can easily overcome such situations without any overcome such situations without any overcome such situations without any trouble at all. And you said always trouble at all. And you said always trouble at all. And you said always focus on learning. What's your approach focus on learning. What's your approach focus on learning. What's your approach to to to learning? What advice can you give on learning? What advice can you give on learning? What advice can you give on how to learn best? Not just when you're how to learn best? Not just when you're how to learn best? Not just when you're young, throughout your young, throughout your young, throughout your life. Let me share a personal example life. Let me share a personal example life. Let me share a personal example with you. with you. with you. I used to learn a lot from I used to learn a lot from I used to learn a lot from reading but these reading but these reading but these days more and days more and days more and more I learn by being fully present. more I learn by being fully present. more I learn by being fully present. Whenever I meet someone I am fully Whenever I meet someone I am fully Whenever I meet someone I am fully present in the moment. I give them my present in the moment. I give them my present in the moment. I give them my full full full attention. These complete focus allows attention. These complete focus allows attention. These complete focus allows me to grasp new concepts me to grasp new concepts me to grasp new concepts quickly. When I'm with you, I'm fully quickly. When I'm with you, I'm fully quickly. When I'm with you, I'm fully present, grounded in the moment. No present, grounded in the moment. No present, grounded in the moment. No calls or messages can pull me away from calls or messages can pull me away from calls or messages can pull me away from this moment with you. I am fully this moment with you. I am fully this moment with you. I am fully present, focused on the here and present, focused on the here and present, focused on the here and now. That's why I always believe this is now. That's why I always believe this is now. That's why I always believe this is a habit everyone should a habit everyone should a habit everyone should embrace. It will sharpen your mind and embrace. It will sharpen your mind and embrace. It will sharpen your mind and improve your learning ability. Besides, improve your learning ability. Besides, improve your learning ability. Besides, knowledge alone cannot light the way. knowledge alone cannot light the way. knowledge alone cannot light the way. You must immerse yourself in the flow of You must immerse yourself in the flow of You must immerse yourself in the flow of practice. You cannot master driving practice. You cannot master driving practice. You cannot master driving merely by reading the life stories of merely by reading the life stories of merely by reading the life stories of great drivers. great drivers. great drivers. You must get behind the wheel and take You must get behind the wheel and take You must get behind the wheel and take the road yourself. You must dare to take the road yourself. You must dare to take the road yourself. You must dare to take risks. You can never master the road. If risks. You can never master the road. If risks. You can never master the road. If fear of accident or death holds you fear of accident or death holds you fear of accident or death holds you back, I truly believe back, I truly believe back, I truly believe that those who live in the present are that those who live in the present are that those who live in the present are the ones who live their life to the the ones who live their life to the the ones who live their life to the fullest. That's because they know that fullest. That's because they know that fullest. That's because they know that every moment every moment every moment lived has already slipped into the past. So you must embrace the moment before it So you must embrace the moment before it So you must embrace the moment before it fades into the fades into the fades into the past. Otherwise, chasing the future only past. Otherwise, chasing the future only past. Otherwise, chasing the future only turns the present into the past. It's turns the present into the past. It's turns the present into the past. It's not a trade worth making. Most not a trade worth making. Most not a trade worth making. Most people stress so much about the future people stress so much about the future people stress so much about the future that their present quietly slips away. that their present quietly slips away. that their present quietly slips away. Before they know it, the moment has Before they know it, the moment has Before they know it, the moment has already faded into the already faded into the already faded into the past. Yeah. I've heard a lot of stories past. Yeah. I've heard a lot of stories past. Yeah. I've heard a lot of stories of uh of you having meetings with people of uh of you having meetings with people of uh of you having meetings with people and it's usually all the distractions and it's usually all the distractions and it's usually all the distractions are there's no distractions. It's just are there's no distractions. It's just are there's no distractions. It's just two human beings just like this and just two human beings just like this and just two human beings just like this and just focused uh on the on the moment and the focused uh on the on the moment and the focused uh on the on the moment and the interaction. That's a really beautiful interaction. That's a really beautiful interaction. That's a really beautiful thing and today really is a gift that thing and today really is a gift that thing and today really is a gift that you would give that focus to me. So you would give that focus to me. So you would give that focus to me. So thank you. Uh let me ask maybe a thank you. Uh let me ask maybe a thank you. Uh let me ask maybe a difficult maybe a human question. difficult maybe a human question. difficult maybe a human question. Do you contemplate your mortality? Are Do you contemplate your mortality? Are Do you contemplate your mortality? Are you afraid of death? Can I ask you a question death? Can I ask you a question death? Can I ask you a question instead? Sure. I have a very interesting instead? Sure. I have a very interesting instead? Sure. I have a very interesting question. Life and death are two sides question. Life and death are two sides question. Life and death are two sides of a coin, but which of the two is more of a coin, but which of the two is more of a coin, but which of the two is more certain? Death. Exactly. certain? Death. Exactly. certain? Death. Exactly. Now with that out of the Now with that out of the Now with that out of the way, we know for a fact that life itself way, we know for a fact that life itself way, we know for a fact that life itself is a whispered promise of death. And yet is a whispered promise of death. And yet is a whispered promise of death. And yet life is also destined to life is also destined to life is also destined to flourish. So again in the dance of life flourish. So again in the dance of life flourish. So again in the dance of life and death only death is and death only death is and death only death is certain. So why fear what is certain? certain. So why fear what is certain? certain. So why fear what is certain? That's why you must embrace That's why you must embrace That's why you must embrace life instead of ftting over life instead of ftting over life instead of ftting over death. That's how life will evolve and death. That's how life will evolve and death. That's how life will evolve and flourish. For it is flourish. For it is flourish. For it is uncertain. That's why you must commit to uncertain. That's why you must commit to uncertain. That's why you must commit to enriching, refining, and elevating your enriching, refining, and elevating your enriching, refining, and elevating your life so you can live fully and with a life so you can live fully and with a life so you can live fully and with a purpose before death comes knocking. purpose before death comes knocking. purpose before death comes knocking. That's why you must let go of the fear That's why you must let go of the fear That's why you must let go of the fear of death. After all, death is inevitable of death. After all, death is inevitable of death. After all, death is inevitable and there's no use worrying about when and there's no use worrying about when and there's no use worrying about when it will arrive. It will arrive when it's it will arrive. It will arrive when it's it will arrive. It will arrive when it's meant meant meant to. What gives you hope about the to. What gives you hope about the to. What gives you hope about the future, not just of India, but all of future, not just of India, but all of future, not just of India, but all of human civilization, all of us humans human civilization, all of us humans human civilization, all of us humans here on Earth? here on Earth? here on Earth? Well, I am an optimist at heart. Well, I am an optimist at heart. Well, I am an optimist at heart. Pessimism and negativity are simply not Pessimism and negativity are simply not Pessimism and negativity are simply not ingrained in my mindset. They don't ingrained in my mindset. They don't ingrained in my mindset. They don't align with the way I align with the way I align with the way I think. That's why I always gravitate think. That's why I always gravitate think. That's why I always gravitate toward the bright side instead. If we take a moment to reflect instead. If we take a moment to reflect instead. If we take a moment to reflect on the history of on the history of on the history of mankind, we see the incredible crisis mankind, we see the incredible crisis mankind, we see the incredible crisis humans have overcome with resilience and humans have overcome with resilience and humans have overcome with resilience and strength. strength. strength. We also see the major changes humanity We also see the major changes humanity We also see the major changes humanity has embraced to evolve with the has embraced to evolve with the has embraced to evolve with the times. And this continuous times. And this continuous times. And this continuous transformation has carried on for transformation has carried on for transformation has carried on for millennia. In every era, it is in human millennia. In every era, it is in human millennia. In every era, it is in human nature to adapt to the everflowing nature to adapt to the everflowing nature to adapt to the everflowing current of change. And while our current of change. And while our current of change. And while our progress has gone through cycles of ups progress has gone through cycles of ups progress has gone through cycles of ups and and and downs, it is those people who can break downs, it is those people who can break downs, it is those people who can break free from the constraints of these historical cycles constraints of these historical cycles constraints of these historical cycles and outdated thinking patterns. It is they who can help patterns. It is they who can help patterns. It is they who can help humanity achieve extraordinary positive humanity achieve extraordinary positive humanity achieve extraordinary positive breakthroughs with an unshackled speed breakthroughs with an unshackled speed breakthroughs with an unshackled speed and grace. transcending the limitations of the old transcending the limitations of the old transcending the limitations of the old way of doing things by way of doing things by way of doing things by embracing change. In this moment, I was wondering change. In this moment, I was wondering change. In this moment, I was wondering if you could guide if you could guide if you could guide me perhaps through a Hindu prayer or me perhaps through a Hindu prayer or me perhaps through a Hindu prayer or meditation for a few moments. I meditation for a few moments. I meditation for a few moments. I uh uh uh uh uh uh learned I'm trying to learn uh the Gaia learned I'm trying to learn uh the Gaia learned I'm trying to learn uh the Gaia tree mantra. tree mantra. tree mantra. uh and in my fast I was trying to do the uh and in my fast I was trying to do the uh and in my fast I was trying to do the chants. Perhaps I could try chanting. chants. Perhaps I could try chanting. chants. Perhaps I could try chanting. You could uh tell me about the You could uh tell me about the You could uh tell me about the importance of this mantra and maybe importance of this mantra and maybe importance of this mantra and maybe others in your life in in your others in your life in in your others in your life in in your spirituality. Should I try? Yes, please. How'd I do? It's okay. You did great. This mantra is dedicated to the great. This mantra is dedicated to the great. This mantra is dedicated to the radiant power of the sun. radiant power of the sun. radiant power of the sun. and is considered a powerful tool for and is considered a powerful tool for and is considered a powerful tool for spiritual spiritual spiritual enlightenment. Many mantras in Hindu enlightenment. Many mantras in Hindu enlightenment. Many mantras in Hindu philosophy are deeply intertwined in some intricate and intertwined in some intricate and intertwined in some intricate and interesting interesting interesting ways with science and nature. Each woven into different facets nature. Each woven into different facets nature. Each woven into different facets of life, chanting mantras on a daily of life, chanting mantras on a daily of life, chanting mantras on a daily basis. basis. basis. brings profound and lasting brings profound and lasting brings profound and lasting benefits in your own spirituality. In benefits in your own spirituality. In benefits in your own spirituality. In your quiet your quiet your quiet moments, when you're with moments, when you're with moments, when you're with God, where does your mind go? What role God, where does your mind go? What role God, where does your mind go? What role do mantras play? do mantras play? do mantras play? uh when you're fasting when you're just uh when you're fasting when you're just uh when you're fasting when you're just alone with alone with alone with yourself the word meditation has been yourself the word meditation has been yourself the word meditation has been overused to the overused to the overused to the point that it feels like a point that it feels like a point that it feels like a cliche in Indian languages we usually cliche in Indian languages we usually cliche in Indian languages we usually refer to it as dian if I dian if I dian if I associate dian to meditation it might associate dian to meditation it might associate dian to meditation it might seem burdensome to some one might think seem burdensome to some one might think seem burdensome to some one might think this is too difficult this is too difficult this is too difficult I'm not an enlightened being, but it's I'm not an enlightened being, but it's I'm not an enlightened being, but it's not rocket science. It just means not rocket science. It just means not rocket science. It just means freeing freeing freeing yourself from yourself from yourself from distraction. For distraction. For distraction. For example, even when you're in example, even when you're in example, even when you're in class, your mind wanders to class, your mind wanders to class, your mind wanders to recess. All you think about is lunch, recess. All you think about is lunch, recess. All you think about is lunch, not the not the not the lesson. Meditation is simply being lesson. Meditation is simply being lesson. Meditation is simply being present in the moment. I recall an present in the moment. I recall an present in the moment. I recall an incident incident incident From my time living in the From my time living in the From my time living in the Himalayas, there I encountered this wise Himalayas, there I encountered this wise Himalayas, there I encountered this wise sage. He taught me a sage. He taught me a sage. He taught me a simple practical technique. It was simple practical technique. It was simple practical technique. It was nothing nothing nothing spiritual. There are several little spiritual. There are several little spiritual. There are several little streams in the Himalayas. streams in the Himalayas. streams in the Himalayas. He positioned a large leaf to catch leaf to catch leaf to catch water from one of those water from one of those water from one of those streams and placed an upside down bowl streams and placed an upside down bowl streams and placed an upside down bowl below so water would drip rhythmically below so water would drip rhythmically below so water would drip rhythmically from the leaf onto the bowl. from the leaf onto the bowl. from the leaf onto the bowl. He asked me to focus only on He asked me to focus only on He asked me to focus only on the dripping water, ignoring all other the dripping water, ignoring all other the dripping water, ignoring all other [Music] [Music] [Music] sounds. Ignore the chirping birds and sounds. Ignore the chirping birds and sounds. Ignore the chirping birds and the soft rustle of the the soft rustle of the the soft rustle of the breeze. He would place the breeze. He would place the breeze. He would place the leaf and I would meditate there for leaf and I would meditate there for leaf and I would meditate there for hours. hours. hours. I I I felt my mind slowly tuning felt my mind slowly tuning felt my mind slowly tuning into the rhythmic sounds of the water into the rhythmic sounds of the water into the rhythmic sounds of the water droplets falling onto the bowl like a droplets falling onto the bowl like a droplets falling onto the bowl like a melody guiding me into deep focus. And melody guiding me into deep focus. And melody guiding me into deep focus. And it's not like I was chanting mantras or it's not like I was chanting mantras or it's not like I was chanting mantras or reciting God's name. I like to call it the divine name. I like to call it the divine name. I like to call it the divine resonance. It was by tuning into that resonance. It was by tuning into that resonance. It was by tuning into that divine resonance that I learned the art divine resonance that I learned the art divine resonance that I learned the art of of of concentration. This practice slowly concentration. This practice slowly concentration. This practice slowly evolved into evolved into evolved into meditation. Sometimes you happen to stay meditation. Sometimes you happen to stay meditation. Sometimes you happen to stay at a fancy at a fancy at a fancy hotel. You get a lavish luxurious room. hotel. You get a lavish luxurious room. hotel. You get a lavish luxurious room. The decor is impeccable and you have The decor is impeccable and you have The decor is impeccable and you have been wholeheartedly been wholeheartedly been wholeheartedly fasting. But there's a dripping faucet fasting. But there's a dripping faucet fasting. But there's a dripping faucet in the bathroom. in the bathroom. in the bathroom. That faint sound is enough to make a That faint sound is enough to make a That faint sound is enough to make a luxurious luxurious luxurious room feel room feel room feel worthless. At times we worthless. At times we worthless. At times we realize the value of realize the value of realize the value of concentration in life's inner concentration in life's inner concentration in life's inner journey. We come to appreciate the journey. We come to appreciate the journey. We come to appreciate the difference a little bit of concentration difference a little bit of concentration difference a little bit of concentration can make. One very interesting concept can make. One very interesting concept can make. One very interesting concept comes to comes to comes to mind from our scriptures. Since we spoke about life and Since we spoke about life and Since we spoke about life and death, I would like to quote a mantra. In other mantra. In other mantra. In other words, all life is part of a complete words, all life is part of a complete words, all life is part of a complete circle and this mantra emphasizes the circle and this mantra emphasizes the circle and this mantra emphasizes the path to achieve that completeness. path to achieve that completeness. path to achieve that completeness. Similarly, Hindus never focus solely on Similarly, Hindus never focus solely on Similarly, Hindus never focus solely on individual well-being. In other words, we wish for well-being. In other words, we wish for well-being. In other words, we wish for the well-being and prosperity of all. This mantra encompasses the idea of all. This mantra encompasses the idea of all. This mantra encompasses the idea of universal well-being and prosperity. And universal well-being and prosperity. And universal well-being and prosperity. And you know how this mantra ends? Om Shanti you know how this mantra ends? Om Shanti you know how this mantra ends? Om Shanti Shanti Shanti. Every Hindu mantra ends Shanti Shanti. Every Hindu mantra ends Shanti Shanti. Every Hindu mantra ends on the same note. Peace, peace, on the same note. Peace, peace, on the same note. Peace, peace, peace. These ancient and powerful peace. These ancient and powerful peace. These ancient and powerful rituals born in India have emerged from thousands of India have emerged from thousands of India have emerged from thousands of years of the spiritual practice of years of the spiritual practice of years of the spiritual practice of sages. They connect us to the essence of sages. They connect us to the essence of sages. They connect us to the essence of life. Shanti, Shanti, Shanti. life. Shanti, Shanti, Shanti. life. Shanti, Shanti, Shanti. Thank you for this honor. Thank you for Thank you for this honor. Thank you for Thank you for this honor. Thank you for this incredible conversation. Thank you this incredible conversation. Thank you this incredible conversation. Thank you for welcoming me to India and uh I can't for welcoming me to India and uh I can't for welcoming me to India and uh I can't wait to break the fast with some Indian wait to break the fast with some Indian wait to break the fast with some Indian food food food tomorrow. Thank you so much, Prime tomorrow. Thank you so much, Prime tomorrow. Thank you so much, Prime Minister. This was an honor. I am Minister. This was an honor. I am Minister. This was an honor. I am thankful for the opportunity to have thankful for the opportunity to have thankful for the opportunity to have this conversation with you. After this conversation with you. After this conversation with you. After fasting for 2 days, I recommend you ease fasting for 2 days, I recommend you ease fasting for 2 days, I recommend you ease into eating slowly and I hope you reap into eating slowly and I hope you reap into eating slowly and I hope you reap great benefits from this fasting great benefits from this fasting great benefits from this fasting experience. experience. experience. I've explored several new realms of I've explored several new realms of I've explored several new realms of thought for the first time ever with you thought for the first time ever with you thought for the first time ever with you today. I had long kept today. I had long kept today. I had long kept those those those thoughts tucked away within myself, but thoughts tucked away within myself, but thoughts tucked away within myself, but today you brought those thoughts to today you brought those thoughts to today you brought those thoughts to light. I light. I light. I hope. Thank you. I hope your viewers may hope. Thank you. I hope your viewers may hope. Thank you. I hope your viewers may enjoy this. It was a great pleasure enjoy this. It was a great pleasure enjoy this. It was a great pleasure speaking with speaking with speaking with you. Thank you. Thank you. you. Thank you. Thank you. you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you for listening to this Thank you for listening to this Thank you for listening to this conversation with Prime Minister conversation with Prime Minister conversation with Prime Minister Narendra Modi. And now, let me answer Narendra Modi. And now, let me answer Narendra Modi. And now, let me answer some questions and try to reflect on and some questions and try to reflect on and some questions and try to reflect on and articulate some things I've been articulate some things I've been articulate some things I've been thinking about. If you would like to thinking about. If you would like to thinking about. If you would like to submit questions or get in touch with me submit questions or get in touch with me submit questions or get in touch with me for whatever reason, go to for whatever reason, go to for whatever reason, go to lexfreedman.com/cont. First, let me give lexfreedman.com/cont. First, let me give lexfreedman.com/cont. First, let me give a shout out to the amazing team around a shout out to the amazing team around a shout out to the amazing team around the prime minister. Everyone was super the prime minister. Everyone was super the prime minister. Everyone was super kind, excellent at what they do, kind, excellent at what they do, kind, excellent at what they do, efficient, great communication and just efficient, great communication and just efficient, great communication and just great people all around. And since I great people all around. And since I great people all around. And since I spoke English and uh Prime Minister Modi spoke English and uh Prime Minister Modi spoke English and uh Prime Minister Modi spoke Hindi, I have to comment on the spoke Hindi, I have to comment on the spoke Hindi, I have to comment on the interpreter who was uh doing interpreter who was uh doing interpreter who was uh doing simultaneous interpreting for both of simultaneous interpreting for both of simultaneous interpreting for both of us. She was absolutely amazing. I can't us. She was absolutely amazing. I can't us. She was absolutely amazing. I can't sing her enough praises from the sing her enough praises from the sing her enough praises from the equipment used to the quality of the equipment used to the quality of the equipment used to the quality of the translation to just the human touch of translation to just the human touch of translation to just the human touch of it all. And in general, my travels it all. And in general, my travels it all. And in general, my travels around Delhi and India revealed to me around Delhi and India revealed to me around Delhi and India revealed to me some early glimpses of what felt like some early glimpses of what felt like some early glimpses of what felt like another world, almost like another another world, almost like another another world, almost like another planet, different culturally from planet, different culturally from planet, different culturally from anything I've experienced before. a anything I've experienced before. a anything I've experienced before. a chaos of human interactions out their chaos of human interactions out their chaos of human interactions out their big dynamic personalities and big dynamic personalities and big dynamic personalities and characters. Obviously, India is composed characters. Obviously, India is composed characters. Obviously, India is composed of many distinct subcultures and Delhi of many distinct subcultures and Delhi of many distinct subcultures and Delhi represents just one slice. Much like represents just one slice. Much like represents just one slice. Much like neither New York or Texas or Iowa alone neither New York or Texas or Iowa alone neither New York or Texas or Iowa alone represent America, they're all different represent America, they're all different represent America, they're all different flavors of America. On my visit, I flavors of America. On my visit, I flavors of America. On my visit, I walked around and rode rickshaws walked around and rode rickshaws walked around and rode rickshaws everywhere, just aimlessly wandering the everywhere, just aimlessly wandering the everywhere, just aimlessly wandering the streets, looking to talk to people about streets, looking to talk to people about streets, looking to talk to people about life. Of course, like many places on life. Of course, like many places on life. Of course, like many places on Earth, there are always some people, Earth, there are always some people, Earth, there are always some people, especially those that have uh something especially those that have uh something especially those that have uh something to sell, who will at first see me as a to sell, who will at first see me as a to sell, who will at first see me as a tourist, a foreign traveler, one with tourist, a foreign traveler, one with tourist, a foreign traveler, one with some money to spend. Like always, I some money to spend. Like always, I some money to spend. Like always, I avoided such shallow interactions and avoided such shallow interactions and avoided such shallow interactions and went straight past the small talk to the went straight past the small talk to the went straight past the small talk to the meaningful meaningful meaningful conversations, shooting the about conversations, shooting the about conversations, shooting the about what they love, what they fear, what what they love, what they fear, what what they love, what they fear, what kind of hardship and triumph they've kind of hardship and triumph they've kind of hardship and triumph they've experienced in their lives. I think the experienced in their lives. I think the experienced in their lives. I think the cool thing about people anywhere on cool thing about people anywhere on cool thing about people anywhere on Earth is they quickly do see the real Earth is they quickly do see the real Earth is they quickly do see the real you past the facad that strangers put up you past the facad that strangers put up you past the facad that strangers put up for each other. if you're vulnerable and for each other. if you're vulnerable and for each other. if you're vulnerable and honest enough to let them. And I tried honest enough to let them. And I tried honest enough to let them. And I tried to do just that. And I should say that to do just that. And I should say that to do just that. And I should say that for the most part, everyone was super for the most part, everyone was super for the most part, everyone was super kind in the genuine human way. Even when kind in the genuine human way. Even when kind in the genuine human way. Even when they didn't speak English, it was always they didn't speak English, it was always they didn't speak English, it was always easy to understand. Probably more than easy to understand. Probably more than easy to understand. Probably more than any other peoples I've interacted with any other peoples I've interacted with any other peoples I've interacted with in India. People's eyes, faces, body in India. People's eyes, faces, body in India. People's eyes, faces, body language, all communicated a lot of language, all communicated a lot of language, all communicated a lot of information, a lot of emotion. Not information, a lot of emotion. Not information, a lot of emotion. Not reserved at all. When I travel through reserved at all. When I travel through reserved at all. When I travel through Eastern Europe, for example, in Eastern Europe, for example, in Eastern Europe, for example, in contrast, reading a person is much contrast, reading a person is much contrast, reading a person is much tougher. The meme does have some truth tougher. The meme does have some truth tougher. The meme does have some truth to it. There's often a protective layer to it. There's often a protective layer to it. There's often a protective layer between the heart of the person and the between the heart of the person and the between the heart of the person and the outside world. In India, it's all there outside world. In India, it's all there outside world. In India, it's all there on full on full on full display. So, I had a lot of epic display. So, I had a lot of epic display. So, I had a lot of epic conversations and interactions as I conversations and interactions as I conversations and interactions as I walked around Delhi for a couple of walked around Delhi for a couple of walked around Delhi for a couple of weeks. In general, on the topic of weeks. In general, on the topic of weeks. In general, on the topic of reading people, I do believe the eyes reading people, I do believe the eyes reading people, I do believe the eyes can often say more than words can. We can often say more than words can. We can often say more than words can. We humans are a fascinating bunch. There humans are a fascinating bunch. There humans are a fascinating bunch. There really is a deep turbulent ocean behind really is a deep turbulent ocean behind really is a deep turbulent ocean behind the surface waves we show the world. In the surface waves we show the world. In the surface waves we show the world. In some sense, what I try to do in some sense, what I try to do in some sense, what I try to do in conversations on and off the mic is to conversations on and off the mic is to conversations on and off the mic is to get to that depth. Anyway, the few weeks get to that depth. Anyway, the few weeks get to that depth. Anyway, the few weeks I spent in India were a magical I spent in India were a magical I spent in India were a magical experience. Traffic alone was a wild experience. Traffic alone was a wild experience. Traffic alone was a wild time, like the world's most difficult time, like the world's most difficult time, like the world's most difficult test for self-driving cars. It reminded test for self-driving cars. It reminded test for self-driving cars. It reminded me of watching nature documentary videos me of watching nature documentary videos me of watching nature documentary videos of swarms of of swarms of of swarms of fish when it's thousands of them fish when it's thousands of them fish when it's thousands of them swimming around at insane speeds, swimming around at insane speeds, swimming around at insane speeds, seemingly in complete chaos. And yet, seemingly in complete chaos. And yet, seemingly in complete chaos. And yet, when looking at the big picture of it, when looking at the big picture of it, when looking at the big picture of it, it all works like a perfectly tuned it all works like a perfectly tuned it all works like a perfectly tuned orchestra. orchestra. orchestra. I will most certainly travel around I will most certainly travel around I will most certainly travel around India with my friend Paul Rosley in the India with my friend Paul Rosley in the India with my friend Paul Rosley in the near future. Maybe with some other near future. Maybe with some other near future. Maybe with some other friends all around from the north of friends all around from the north of friends all around from the north of India to the India to the India to the south. Now allow me to also comment south. Now allow me to also comment south. Now allow me to also comment about one of the books that first drew about one of the books that first drew about one of the books that first drew me toward India and to its deep history me toward India and to its deep history me toward India and to its deep history of philosophical and spiritual of philosophical and spiritual of philosophical and spiritual traditions. The book is Sedartha by traditions. The book is Sedartha by traditions. The book is Sedartha by Herman Hess. I first read most of Herman Hess. I first read most of Herman Hess. I first read most of Hessa's major work as a teenager but Hessa's major work as a teenager but Hessa's major work as a teenager but then reread them again through the then reread them again through the then reread them again through the years. It first found me Sedartha when I years. It first found me Sedartha when I years. It first found me Sedartha when I was immersed in a very different kind of was immersed in a very different kind of was immersed in a very different kind of literature of Dusty, Kimu, Kofka, literature of Dusty, Kimu, Kofka, literature of Dusty, Kimu, Kofka, Orwell, Hemingway, Carowak, Steinbeach Orwell, Hemingway, Carowak, Steinbeach Orwell, Hemingway, Carowak, Steinbeach and so on. Many of these explore the and so on. Many of these explore the and so on. Many of these explore the same human condition that puzzled me same human condition that puzzled me same human condition that puzzled me when I was a young man and still puzzles when I was a young man and still puzzles when I was a young man and still puzzles me today even more so. But Sedartha was me today even more so. But Sedartha was me today even more so. But Sedartha was my introduction to the eastern way of my introduction to the eastern way of my introduction to the eastern way of looking at these puzzles. It was written looking at these puzzles. It was written looking at these puzzles. It was written by Herman Hess. And by the way, please by Herman Hess. And by the way, please by Herman Hess. And by the way, please allow me this pronunciation of his last allow me this pronunciation of his last allow me this pronunciation of his last name. I've heard some people say Hess, name. I've heard some people say Hess, name. I've heard some people say Hess, but my whole life I've always said Hess. but my whole life I've always said Hess. but my whole life I've always said Hess. So anyway, it was written by Herman So anyway, it was written by Herman So anyway, it was written by Herman Hess, a German Swiss Nobel Prize-winning Hess, a German Swiss Nobel Prize-winning Hess, a German Swiss Nobel Prize-winning writer during one of the darkest periods writer during one of the darkest periods writer during one of the darkest periods of his own life. His marriage was of his own life. His marriage was of his own life. His marriage was failing. World War I had shattered his failing. World War I had shattered his failing. World War I had shattered his pacifist ideals, and he suffered from pacifist ideals, and he suffered from pacifist ideals, and he suffered from debilitating headaches, insomnia, and debilitating headaches, insomnia, and debilitating headaches, insomnia, and depression. During this period, he began depression. During this period, he began depression. During this period, he began psychoanalysis with Carl Jung, which in psychoanalysis with Carl Jung, which in psychoanalysis with Carl Jung, which in part led him to explore Eastern part led him to explore Eastern part led him to explore Eastern philosophies as a way to heal his philosophies as a way to heal his philosophies as a way to heal his fractured fractured fractured psyche. Hi immersed himself in psyche. Hi immersed himself in psyche. Hi immersed himself in translations of ancient Hindu and translations of ancient Hindu and translations of ancient Hindu and Buddhist texts studying the aanishads Buddhist texts studying the aanishads Buddhist texts studying the aanishads and the Bhagavad Gita and so the writing and the Bhagavad Gita and so the writing and the Bhagavad Gita and so the writing of Sedartha was in itself for him a of Sedartha was in itself for him a of Sedartha was in itself for him a journey that paralleled that of the main journey that paralleled that of the main journey that paralleled that of the main character in the book. Hess started character in the book. Hess started character in the book. Hess started writing the book in 1919 and finished 3 writing the book in 1919 and finished 3 writing the book in 1919 and finished 3 years later experiencing an extensive years later experiencing an extensive years later experiencing an extensive psychological crisis in the middle. The psychological crisis in the middle. The psychological crisis in the middle. The book follows Sedartha, a young man in book follows Sedartha, a young man in book follows Sedartha, a young man in ancient India, as he leaves behind ancient India, as he leaves behind ancient India, as he leaves behind wealth and comfort, the search for wealth and comfort, the search for wealth and comfort, the search for meaning. You can feel his personal meaning. You can feel his personal meaning. You can feel his personal struggle in every page. Sedartha's struggle in every page. Sedartha's struggle in every page. Sedartha's restlessness, his dissatisfaction with restlessness, his dissatisfaction with restlessness, his dissatisfaction with conventional wisdom, his need to find conventional wisdom, his need to find conventional wisdom, his need to find truth through direct experience. Again, truth through direct experience. Again, truth through direct experience. Again, the book wasn't simply a philosophical the book wasn't simply a philosophical the book wasn't simply a philosophical exploration for Hess. It was exploration for Hess. It was exploration for Hess. It was psychological survival. He was writing psychological survival. He was writing psychological survival. He was writing his way out of suffering and towards his his way out of suffering and towards his his way out of suffering and towards his own own own enlightenment. I won't go into a deep enlightenment. I won't go into a deep enlightenment. I won't go into a deep analysis of the book here, but I will analysis of the book here, but I will analysis of the book here, but I will mention two key lessons I took away and mention two key lessons I took away and mention two key lessons I took away and carried with me to this day. First carried with me to this day. First carried with me to this day. First lesson comes from the scene in the book lesson comes from the scene in the book lesson comes from the scene in the book that to me is one of the great scenes in that to me is one of the great scenes in that to me is one of the great scenes in all of literature. Sedartha is sitting all of literature. Sedartha is sitting all of literature. Sedartha is sitting by a river just listening. And in that by a river just listening. And in that by a river just listening. And in that river, he hears all of life, all sounds, river, he hears all of life, all sounds, river, he hears all of life, all sounds, all voices, all of time, past, present, all voices, all of time, past, present, all voices, all of time, past, present, future, flowing together as future, flowing together as future, flowing together as one. That scene gave me the experience one. That scene gave me the experience one. That scene gave me the experience and the notion that while in some and the notion that while in some and the notion that while in some grounded human sense, the linear arrow grounded human sense, the linear arrow grounded human sense, the linear arrow of time does exist, in another sense, of time does exist, in another sense, of time does exist, in another sense, time is a kind of illusion. That in time is a kind of illusion. That in time is a kind of illusion. That in fact, everything exists simultaneously. fact, everything exists simultaneously. fact, everything exists simultaneously. that our lives are both momentary and that our lives are both momentary and that our lives are both momentary and eternal. It is hard to describe these eternal. It is hard to describe these eternal. It is hard to describe these ideas with words. I think they must be ideas with words. I think they must be ideas with words. I think they must be experienced as personal experienced as personal experienced as personal revelations. I'm reminded of the fish revelations. I'm reminded of the fish revelations. I'm reminded of the fish story that David Foster Wallace, another story that David Foster Wallace, another story that David Foster Wallace, another one of my favorite writers, described in one of my favorite writers, described in one of my favorite writers, described in a commencement speech 20 years ago. The a commencement speech 20 years ago. The a commencement speech 20 years ago. The story goes, two young fish are swimming story goes, two young fish are swimming story goes, two young fish are swimming along when they encounter an older fish along when they encounter an older fish along when they encounter an older fish swimming the opposite way. The older swimming the opposite way. The older swimming the opposite way. The older fish nods and says, "Morning, boys. fish nods and says, "Morning, boys. fish nods and says, "Morning, boys. How's the How's the How's the water?" The young fish swim on and water?" The young fish swim on and water?" The young fish swim on and eventually one turns to the other and eventually one turns to the other and eventually one turns to the other and asks, "What the hell is water?" The asks, "What the hell is water?" The asks, "What the hell is water?" The illusion of the forward progress of time illusion of the forward progress of time illusion of the forward progress of time is water in this metaphor. As humans, is water in this metaphor. As humans, is water in this metaphor. As humans, we're fully immersed in it. But we're fully immersed in it. But we're fully immersed in it. But enlightenment in part involves being enlightenment in part involves being enlightenment in part involves being able to step back and get a glimpse at able to step back and get a glimpse at able to step back and get a glimpse at another deeper perspective on reality another deeper perspective on reality another deeper perspective on reality where all things are inextricably where all things are inextricably where all things are inextricably interconnected across both time and interconnected across both time and interconnected across both time and space. space. space. Another key lesson from the novel that Another key lesson from the novel that Another key lesson from the novel that was especially formative to me as a was especially formative to me as a was especially formative to me as a young man was that one should not young man was that one should not young man was that one should not blindly follow others or learn about the blindly follow others or learn about the blindly follow others or learn about the world exclusively through books, but world exclusively through books, but world exclusively through books, but rather forge your own path and thrust rather forge your own path and thrust rather forge your own path and thrust yourself into the world where the yourself into the world where the yourself into the world where the lessons of life can only be learned by lessons of life can only be learned by lessons of life can only be learned by experiencing them experiencing them experiencing them directly. And every experience, both directly. And every experience, both directly. And every experience, both positive and negative, mistakes, positive and negative, mistakes, positive and negative, mistakes, suffering, and even seemingly wasted suffering, and even seemingly wasted suffering, and even seemingly wasted time, is all an essential part of time, is all an essential part of time, is all an essential part of growth. To this point, Hess draws a growth. To this point, Hess draws a growth. To this point, Hess draws a distinction between knowledge and distinction between knowledge and distinction between knowledge and wisdom. Knowledge can be taught by wisdom. Knowledge can be taught by wisdom. Knowledge can be taught by others. Wisdom can only be gathered others. Wisdom can only be gathered others. Wisdom can only be gathered through experiencing the full mess of through experiencing the full mess of through experiencing the full mess of life yourself. life yourself. life yourself. In other words, the path to In other words, the path to In other words, the path to understanding isn't through rejection of understanding isn't through rejection of understanding isn't through rejection of the world, but through complete the world, but through complete the world, but through complete immersion in it. Those are my early immersion in it. Those are my early immersion in it. Those are my early steps in seeing the world through the steps in seeing the world through the steps in seeing the world through the lens of Eastern philosophy. But many of lens of Eastern philosophy. But many of lens of Eastern philosophy. But many of H's books had an impact on me. I would H's books had an impact on me. I would H's books had an impact on me. I would recommend to read Damian when you are recommend to read Damian when you are recommend to read Damian when you are younger, Stephen Wolf when you are younger, Stephen Wolf when you are younger, Stephen Wolf when you are older, Sedarthur throughout your life, older, Sedarthur throughout your life, older, Sedarthur throughout your life, especially in moments of crisis, and the especially in moments of crisis, and the especially in moments of crisis, and the glass bead game if you want to take on glass bead game if you want to take on glass bead game if you want to take on Hess's Magnum Opus that rigorously Hess's Magnum Opus that rigorously Hess's Magnum Opus that rigorously explores the ways the human mind and explores the ways the human mind and explores the ways the human mind and human civilization can engage in the human civilization can engage in the human civilization can engage in the pursuit of knowledge, wisdom, and pursuit of knowledge, wisdom, and pursuit of knowledge, wisdom, and meaning. But Sedartha is the only one meaning. But Sedartha is the only one meaning. But Sedartha is the only one I've returned to more than twice. In my I've returned to more than twice. In my I've returned to more than twice. In my own life, when faced with a difficult own life, when faced with a difficult own life, when faced with a difficult situation, I often return to the moment situation, I often return to the moment situation, I often return to the moment in the book when Sedartha is asked what in the book when Sedartha is asked what in the book when Sedartha is asked what skills he possesses. And his answer is skills he possesses. And his answer is skills he possesses. And his answer is simply, I can think, I can wait, I can simply, I can think, I can wait, I can simply, I can think, I can wait, I can fast. Let me elaborate. Indeed, for the fast. Let me elaborate. Indeed, for the fast. Let me elaborate. Indeed, for the first part, I can think. As Marcus first part, I can think. As Marcus first part, I can think. As Marcus Aurelius said, the quality of your life Aurelius said, the quality of your life Aurelius said, the quality of your life is determined by the quality of your is determined by the quality of your is determined by the quality of your thoughts. For the second part, I can thoughts. For the second part, I can thoughts. For the second part, I can wait. Patience and waiting often is wait. Patience and waiting often is wait. Patience and waiting often is indeed the optimal decision when facing indeed the optimal decision when facing indeed the optimal decision when facing a problem. Time does bring clarity and a problem. Time does bring clarity and a problem. Time does bring clarity and depth of depth of depth of understanding. For the third part, I can understanding. For the third part, I can understanding. For the third part, I can fast when needed. Being able to live and fast when needed. Being able to live and fast when needed. Being able to live and flourish with less is a prerequisite of flourish with less is a prerequisite of flourish with less is a prerequisite of being free when the mind, the body, and being free when the mind, the body, and being free when the mind, the body, and society all are trying to put you in society all are trying to put you in society all are trying to put you in cages. All right, friends. Now, sadly, cages. All right, friends. Now, sadly, cages. All right, friends. Now, sadly, our time together in this episode has our time together in this episode has our time together in this episode has come to a close. As always, thank you come to a close. As always, thank you come to a close. As always, thank you for being here and thank you for your for being here and thank you for your for being here and thank you for your support through the years. support through the years. support through the years. Let me leave you with a few words from Let me leave you with a few words from Let me leave you with a few words from the Bhagavad the Bhagavad the Bhagavad Gita. He who experiences the unity of Gita. He who experiences the unity of Gita. He who experiences the unity of life sees his own self in all beings and life sees his own self in all beings and life sees his own self in all beings and all beings in his own self and looks all beings in his own self and looks all beings in his own self and looks onto everything with an impartial onto everything with an impartial onto everything with an impartial eye. Thank you for listening. I hope to eye. Thank you for listening. I hope to eye. Thank you for listening. I hope to see you next time.